Economics deals primarily with the concept of
0 change.
0 power.
0 poverty.
1 scarcity.

Scarcity exists when
0 the price of a good rises.
0 society can meet the wants of every individual.
1 there is less of a good or resource available than people wish to have.
0 there is less than an infinite amount of a resource or good.

Economics is defined as the study of
1 how society manages its scarce resources.
0 business.
0 central planning.
0 government regulation.

A good definition of equity would be
0 efficiency.
0 eliminating extreme affluence.
1 fairness.
0 everyone receiving the same income.

When government policies are being designed,
0 increasing efficiency usually results in more equity.
1 there is usually a tradeoff between equity and efficiency.
0 equity can usually be achieved without an efficiency loss.
0 equity and efficiency goals are usually independent of each other.

The opportunity cost of an item is
1 what you give up to get that item.
0 always equal to the dollar value of the item.
0 always less than the dollar value of the item.
0 the number of hours needed to earn the money to buy it.

Ryan spends an hour studying instead of going for a bike ride. The opportunity cost to him of studying is
0 the improvement in his grades from studying for the hour.
1 the enjoyment and exercise he would have received had he gone for a bike ride.
0 the difference between the improvement in his grades from studying minus the enjoyment of a bike ride.
0 zero. Since Ryan chose to study rather than to ride his bike, the value of studying must have been greater than the value of the bike ride.

A rational decision maker takes an action only if the
1 marginal benefit is greater than the marginal cost.
0 average benefit is greater than the average cost.
0 marginal benefit is less than the marginal cost.
0 marginal benefit is greater than both the average cost and the marginal cost.

A marginal change is a
0 long-term trend.
0 change for the worse.
1 small incremental adjustment.
0 large, significant adjustment.

Economists understand that people respond to
0 the wishes of policymakers.
0 tax breaks, but not tax hikes.
0 threats more than rewards.
1 incentives.

Which is the most accurate statement about trade?
1 Trade can make every nation better off.
0 Trade makes some nations better off and others worse off.
0 Trade helps rich nations and hurts poor nations.
0 Trading for a good can make a nation better off only if the nation cannot produce that good.

If Canada is better than the United States at producing hockey sticks, but the United States is better than Canada at producing roller blades, the United States should
0 put a quota on the amount of Canadian hockey sticks imported.
0 	subsidize its hockey stick industry so that it can compete with Canadian hockey sticks.
1 sell roller blades to Canada, and buy Canadian hockey sticks.
0 impose a tariff on Canadian hockey sticks in order to protect jobs in the U.S. roller blade industry.

In a market economy, economic activity is guided by
0 the government.
0 corporations.
0 central planners.
1 prices.

One advantage market economies have over central planning is that market economies
0 solve the problem of scarcity.
1 are more efficient.
0 establish government economic control.
0 provide an equal distribution of goods and services to consumers.

The term market failure refers to
0 an unsuccessful advertising campaign.
1 a situation in which the market on its own fails to allocate resources efficiently.
0 a situation in which competition among firms becomes ruthless.
0 a firm which is forced out of business because of losses.

An externality is the impact of
0 a person’s actions on that person’s well-being.
0 society’s decisions on the well-being of society.
1 one person’s actions on the well-being of a bystander.
0 society’s decisions on the well-being of one person.

If a copper refinery does NOT bear the entire cost of the smoke it emits, it will
1 	emit too much smoke.
0 	emit lower levels of smoke.
0 	emit an acceptable level of smoke.
0 	eliminate all smoke so as to avoid the entire cost of the smoke.

The two best reasons for a government to intervene in a market are to
0 promote equity and to raise revenues.
1 promote equity and to promote efficiency.
0 promote efficiency and to raise revenues.
0 raise revenues and to promote stability.

Market power refers to the
0 power of the government to regulate a market.
0 relative importance of a market to the overall economy.
1 power of a single person (or small group of people) to unduly influence market prices.
0 ability of a person or group of people to successfully market new products.

The income of a typical worker in a country is most closely linked to which of the following?
0 population
0 government policies
0 labor unions
1 productivity

Almost all variation in living standards is attributable to differences in countries’
0 population growth rates.
0 endowments of natural resources.
0 defense budgets.
1 productivity.

Productivity is defined as the
1 amount of goods and services produced from each hour of a worker’s time.
0 number of workers required to produce a given amount of goods and services.
0 amount of labor which can be saved by replacing workers with machines.
0 actual amount of effort workers put into an hour of working time.

Inflation is defined as
0 a period of rising productivity in the economy.
1 an increase in the overall level of prices in the economy.
0 a period of rising income in the economy.
0 an increase in the overall level of output in the economy.

Inflation causes
0 productivity to increase.
0 the value of money to rise.
1 the value of money to fall.
0 the government to lower taxes.

Which of the following is the most correct statement about the relationship between inflation and unemployment?
0 In the long run, reducing inflation is associated with rising unemployment.
0 In the short run, reducing inflation is associated with falling unemployment.
0 In the long run, reducing inflation is associated with falling unemployment.
1 In the short run, reducing inflation is associated with rising unemployment.

Scarcity is the result of
0 an unfair distribution of income.
0 taxes that are too low.
0 taxes that are too high.
1 too few resources to satisfy society’s desires.

	A good is considered to be scarce in a society when
0 	firms could be producing more of the good but have decided not to.
0 the government places a tax on the good in an attempt to lower the demand for it.
1 everyone in that society cannot have all they want of the good.
0 only the richest people in the economy can buy all they want of the good.

	Economics is the study of
0 the government’s role in society.
1 how society manages its scarce resources.
0 how to operate a profitable business.
0 successful stock market investing.

Efficiency is most closely defined by which of the following?
0 absolute fairness
1 minimum waste
0 equal distribution
0 consumer sovereignty

Economists use the word equity to describe a situation in which
0 every member of society would have the same income.
1 benefits of society’s resources are distributed fairly among its members.
0 society is getting the most it can from its scarce resources.
0 those in society who have the least will receive the most.

When the government implements such programs as welfare assistance and progressive income tax rates, which of the following is likely to occur?
0 Equity is increased and efficiency is increased.
0 Equity is decreased and efficiency is increased.
1 Equity is increased and efficiency is decreased.
0 Equity is decreased and efficiency is decreased.

Economists use the phrase “There is no such thing as a free lunch,” to illustrate
0 the concept of inflation.
1 the concept of tradeoffs.
0 that people aren’t as generous today as they used to be.
0 that if something looks too good to be true, it probably is.

Whatever must be given up to obtain an item is the definition of
0 equity.
0 an explicit cost.
0 efficiency.
1 opportunity cost.

When economists refer to people making decisions “at the margin” they mean that people
0 make decisions only if those decisions do not impose a cost.
0 evaluate how easily a decision can be reversed if problems arise.
0 always calculate the dollar costs for each decision.
1 compare the costs and benefits of each decision.

Which of the following is the best example of a marginal change?
1 Jayson gets a raise at his part-time job and is now paid $6.75 per hour instead of $6.50.
0 After graduating college, Megan’s income increases from $500 per month to $3,000 per month.
0 Due to an increase in the crime rates of a local suburb, housing prices in the area fall by 40%.
0 A hard freeze wipes out half of the orange crop in Florida and the price of orange juice doubles.

When economists say that individuals respond to incentives, they mean that
0 individuals act very quickly when faced with a problem.
0 individuals respond to positive stimuli, but not to negative stimuli.
1 if the benefit of an activity increases, people will engage in more of that activity.
0 once individuals have made a mistake, they will never make the same mistake again.

If Japan decides to trade with Bangladesh, we know that
0 Bangladesh will be better off, but trading with a less-developed country will not help Japan.
1 Bangladesh and Japan will both be better off with trade.
0 it will not benefit Bangladesh because workers in Japan are more productive.
0 it will not benefit either country because they are too culturally different.

Any nation which chooses to engage in trade
0 will only benefit if it trades with countries that produce goods it cannot produce.
0 cannot benefit if it trades with less-developed countries.
1 can benefit by trading with any other country.
0 should first attempt to produce the good itself.

In Adam Smith’s book The Wealth of Nations, the “invisible hand” refers to
0 human kindness.
1 the free market system.
0 supernatural beings.
0 government restrictions.

Profit and self-interest guide the decisions of firms and households in a
0 command economy.
0 traditional economy.
1 market economy.
0 all of the above

When a market, left on its own, fails to allocate resources efficiently, which of the following has occurred?
0 government interference
0 economic meltdown
0 monopoly power
1 market failure

Which of the following would be an example of an externality?
1 A construction company remodels several run-down, vacant homes in a low-income part of town, improving property values.
0 Teachers at a local high school have pizza delivered every Friday for lunch.
0 An elderly couple purchases a hot tub to ease their arthritis.
0 John buys a tractor to mow his newly purchased 5-acre lot.

Market failure can be caused by
0 market power and supply shocks.
1 externalities and market power.
0 government intervention and low consumer demand.
0 high prices and foreign competition.

An example of a firm with market power would be a
0 video rental store in Dallas.
0 farmer in Iowa.
0 gas station in Tallahassee.
1 cable TV provider in a Kansas City suburb.

The primary determinant of a country’s standard of living is
0 the ability to reduce foreign competition.
1 its ability to produce goods and services.
0 the total supply of money in the economy.
0 the average age of the country’s labor force.

Suppose that the average income of a Brazilian is higher than the average income of a Canadian. You might conclude that
0 Canadian firms are faced with stricter government regulations than in Brazil.
0 total income is divided among fewer workers in Brazil than in Canada since Brazil has a smaller labor force than Canada.
1 productivity in Brazil is higher than in Canada.
0 Brazil’s climate allows for longer growing seasons and therefore Brazil can produce large quantities of grain.

If the government wanted to enact a policy to increase living standards in the country, it should
1 increase educational opportunities for workers.
0 make it more difficult to receive unemployment benefits.
0 strictly enforce all workplace safety regulations.
0 prohibit any union from restricting membership.

In most cases, the cause of high or persistent inflation is
0 increased government regulations.
0 higher worker productivity.
1 growth in the quantity of money.
0 an increased demand for domestic production.

In the 1920s, the quantity of money in Germany was increased. As a result
0 unemployment increased.
0 many people in Germany became rich.
1 Germany experienced hyperinflation.
0 Germany was able to repay all its foreign debts.

According to the Phillips curve
0 there is no tradeoff between inflation and unemployment.
0 if inflation increases, so does unemployment.
0 increases in unemployment are associated with a rise in prices.
1 there is a short-run tradeoff between inflation and unemployment.

The production possibilities frontier is a
0 map which shows the frontier beyond which agriculture is unprofitable.
0 map which shows areas of the world in which capitalist production is now possible.
1 graph that shows the various combinations of output that the economy can possibly produce given the available resources and technology.
0 graph which shows the various combinations of resources that can be used to produce a given level of output.

Which of the following concepts is NOT illustrated by the production possibilities frontier?
0 efficiency
0 opportunity cost
1 equity
0 tradeoffs

The opportunity cost of obtaining more of one good is shown on the production possibilities frontier as the
1 amount of the other good which must be given up.
0 market price of the additional amount produced.
0 amount of resources which must be devoted to its production.
0 number of dollars which must be spent to produce it.

A production possibilities frontier will be linear and not bowed out if
0 no tradeoffs exist.
1 the tradeoff between the two goods is always at a constant rate.
0 the unemployment rate is zero.
0 resources are allocated efficiently.


Which of the following would be considered a topic of study in microeconomics?
0 the effect of changes in saving rates on GDP
1 the impact of minimum-wage laws on employment in the fast-food industry
0 the impact of monetary policy on the rate of inflation
0 the effect of tax policy on the rate of economic growth

Since economists are unable to obtain economic data by conducting experiments, they generally must
0 do without data.
1 use whatever data the world gives them.
0 select a committee of economists to make up data for all economists to use.
0 ask policymakers to conduct experiments for them.

Models
1 allow economists to learn how the economy works.
0 make the economics profession more difficult than necessary.
0 based on false assumptions cannot be useful to economists.
0 must include every possible variable in the economy to be useful to economists.

When building a model, economists begin by
0 applying for government funding.
0 conducting controlled experiments in a lab.
1 making assumptions.
0 reviewing statistical forecasts.

In a simple two-sector circular-flow diagram,
0 firms are sellers in the resource market and the product market.
1 households are sellers in the resource market.
0 firms are buyers in the product market.
0 households are buyers in both the resource market and the product market.

In a simple two-sector circular-flow diagram,
0 spending on goods and services flow from firms to households.
0 goods and services flow from households to firms.
0 factors of production flow from firms to households.
1 income from factors of production flows from firms to households.

Which of the following statements about production possibilities frontiers is correct?
0 An economy can produce only on its production possibilities frontier.
0 More than one point on a production possibilities frontier can be produced if there is an increase in available resources.
1 An economy can produce at any point on or inside the production possibilities frontier.
0 An economy can produce at any point outside the production possibilities frontier

A point that is on a production possibilities frontier represents a combination of two goods that an economy
0 will never be able to produce.
1 can produce using all available resources and technology.
0 can produce using some of its resources and technology.
0 may be able to produce sometime in the future with additional resources and technology.

The curved shape of the production possibilities frontier can be explained by
1 the fact that some resources are better suited for some types of production than are other resources.
0 constant cost production.
0 scarcity.
0 economic growth.

Suppose a nation is currently producing at a point inside its production possibilities frontier. We know that
0 the nation is producing beyond its capacity, and inflation will occur.
1 the nation is producing inefficiently.
0 the nation is producing efficiently.
0 there will be a large opportunity cost if the nation tries to increase production.

Anytime an economy’s production possibilities frontier shifts outward, we can say that this economy is experiencing
1 economic growth.
0 a downturn in the economy.
0 a more equitable distribution of income within the economy.
0 an improvement in the allocation of available resources.

Macroeconomics is concerned primarily with the
0 way things are produced.
0 prices of particular goods and services.
0 behavior of consumers.
1 study of economy-wide phenomena.

“The government should use any budget surplus to reduce taxes instead of paying down the national debt” is an example of
0 a positive economic statement.
0 sound fiscal management.
1 a normative economic statement.
0 a welfare statement.

Economists from the Treasury Department provide
0 the annual Economic Report of the President.
1 advice on tax policy to the President.
0 enforcement of the U. S. Antitrust laws.
0 Congress with the annual budget.

The slope of a straight line is calculated by
1 rise divided by run.
0 run divided by rise.
0 the average of rise and run.
0 rise plus run.

A country’s consumption possibilities frontier can be outside its production possibilities frontier
1 with trade.
0 by allocating resources differently.
0 by lowering unemployment in the country.
0 by producing a greater variety of goods and services.

If labor in Mexico is less productive than labor in the United States in all areas of production,
0 neither nation can benefit from trade.
0 Mexico can benefit from trade but the United States cannot.
1 both nations can benefit from trade.
0 Mexico will not have a comparative advantage in any good.


Comparative advantage is based on
0 capital costs.
0 labor costs.
0 dollar price.
1 opportunity costs.

Absolute advantage is found by
0 comparing opportunity costs.
0 calculating the dollar cost of production.
0 first determining which country has a comparative advantage.
1 comparing the productivity of one nation to that of another.

The principle of comparative advantage was developed by
0 Adam Smith.
0 Harry Truman.
1 David Ricardo.
0 John Maynard Keynes.

Economists generally support
0 government management of trade.
1 free international trade.
0 trade restrictions.
0 export subsidies.

Karl Malone (1997 NBA MVP) is a better basketball player and truck driver than Gregory Mankiw (the author of your economics text). Which of the following is true?
1 Karl Malone and Gregory Mankiw may benefit from trade.
0 Karl Malone would be better off playing basketball and driving his own truck.
0 Karl Malone will probably have a comparative advantage in both goods.
0 Karl Malone will have a lower opportunity cost of playing basketball and truck driving than will Gregory Mankiw.

Exports are
0 a limit placed on the quantity of goods brought into a country.
1 goods produced domestically and sold abroad.
0 usually a country’s least desirable product.
0 	goods produced abroad and sold domestically.

The United States could benefit by
0 promoting imports and restricting exports.
0 restricting imports and promoting exports.
0 restricting both imports and exports.
1 not restricting trade.

The gains from trade are
0 higher from trade between a rich nation and a poor nation.
1 a result of more efficient resource allocation.
0 based on different wage rates between nations.
0 based on the principle of absolute advantage.

If a country chooses not to trade, then that country
0 will be better off.
0 is outside its own production possibilities frontier.
1 will have a production possibilities frontier equal to its consumption possibilities frontier.
0 will be able to produce and consume a greater variety of goods and services.

Which of the following statements about trade is NOT correct?
0 Trade allows for specialization.
0 Trade improves a country’s standard of living.
1 Trade is based on absolute advantage.
0 Trade is based on which country experiences lower opportunity cost to produce.

In one hour Matt can debug one computer program or type ten pages of a report. Matt’s opportunity cost of debugging a computer program is
0 one page of a report.
1 ten pages of a report.
0 1/10 of a page of a report.
0 one hour of his time.

If Shawn can produce donuts at a lower opportunity cost than Sue, then
1 Shawn has a comparative advantage in the production of donuts.
0 Sue has a comparative advantage in the production of donuts.
0 Shawn should be retrained to produce a different product.
0 it is obvious that Shawn is capable of producing more donuts than Sue.









Gains from trade occur when trade is based on
0 the amount of labor resources the two countries have.
0 the rate of inflation in the two countries.
0 absolute advantage.
1 comparative advantage.

Which of the following is true when countries specialize according to their comparative advantage?
1 It is possible to increase world output of all goods.
0 It is possible to increase world output of some goods only by reducing the output of others.
0 One country is likely to gain from trade while others lose.
0 All countries will lose from trade.

A good that is produced abroad and sold domestically is called
0 a quota.
0 a tariff.
1 an import.
0 an export.

A tax placed on imported goods is called
0 a quota.
1 a tariff.
0 an import.
0 an export.

David Ricardo
0 believed that barriers to trade, such as tariffs and quotas, were necessary to promote a country’s economic growth.
1 argued in favor of Britain following a free-trade policy.
0 was the founder of modern economics.
0 wrote Why Nations Trade.

Trade can make everybody better off because it
0 increases cooperation among nations.
0 increases labor costs of production.
0 requires some workers in an economy to be retrained.
1 allows people to specialize according to comparative advantage.

Assume that Hungary has a comparative advantage in wheat and Germany has a comparative advantage in cars. If these two countries specialize and trade according to their comparative advantage
0 Hungary will specialize in and export wheat.
0 some individuals in each country will be hurt.
0 more of each good can be consumed in both countries.
1 All of the above are correct.

Assume that Hungary has a comparative advantage in wheat and Germany has a comparative advantage in cars. If these two countries specialize and trade according to their comparative advantage
0 all individuals in both countries will benefit.
0 Hungary will specialize in and export cars.
1 Germany will produce more cars than in the absence of trade.
0 Germany will produce more wheat than in the absence of trade.

A market is a
0 place where only buyers come together.
0 place where only sellers meet.
0 group of people with common desires.
1 group of buyers and sellers of a particular good or service.

A monopoly is a market
1 with one seller.
0 with few sellers.
0 with one buyer.
0 where the government sets the price.

When we are studying the behavior of buyers, we are studying
0 supply.
1 demand.
0 an entire market.
0 government regulation.

A demand curve is the
0 curve that relates income with quantity demanded.
0 upward-sloping line relating price with quantity supplied.
1 downward-sloping line relating the price of the good with the quantity demanded.
0 None of the above answers is correct.

If a good is “normal,” then an increase in income will result in
0 a lower market price.
0 a decrease in the demand for the good.
1 an increase in the demand for the good.
0 no change in the demand for the good.

If the price of a substitute to good X increases, then the
0 demand for good X will decrease.
1 demand for good X will increase.
0 market price of good X will decrease.
0 demand for good X will not change.

What will happen in the rice market if buyers are expecting higher prices in the near future?
0 The supply of rice will increase.
0 The demand for rice will decrease.
1 The demand for rice will increase.
0 The demand for rice will be unaffected.

Ceteris paribus is a Latin phrase that literally means
0 “after this therefore because of this.”
1 “other things being equal.”
0 “to respond slowly to a change in price.”
0 “There’s no such thing as a free lunch.”

Which of the following would NOT shift the demand curve for a good or service?
0 a change in income
0 a change in the price of a related good
1 a change in the price of the good or service
0 a change in expectations about the price of the good or service

If the number of buyers in the market decreases, the
1 demand in the market will decrease.
0 supply in the market will increase.
0 demand in the market will increase.
0 supply in the market will decrease.

When the price of a good or service changes,
0 supply shifts in the opposite direction.
0 demand shifts in the opposite direction.
0 demand shifts in the same direction.
1 there is a movement along a stable demand curve.

A supply curve slopes upward because
0 a decrease in input prices decreases supply.
0 an increase in input prices increases supply.
0 as more is produced, per-unit costs of production fall.
1 an increase in price gives producers incentive to supply a larger quantity.

A technological advancement will shift the
0 supply curve to the left.
0 demand curve to the left.
1 supply curve to the right.
0 demand curve to the right.

Suppose there is an increase in input prices. We would expect supply
0 to increase.
1 to decrease.
0 to remain unchanged.
0 to either increase or decrease.

The unique point at which the supply and demand curves intersect is called
0 cohesion.
0 market unity.
1 equilibrium.
0 an agreement.


If there is a shortage of farm laborers, we would expect
1 the wages of farm laborers to increase.
0 the wages of farm laborers to decrease.
0 the prices of farm commodities to decrease.
0 a decrease in the demand for substitutes of farm labor.

At the equilibrium price
0 sellers would eventually require a higher price.
1 there will be no pressure on price to rise or fall.
0 there can still be upward or downward pressure on price.
0 buyers would not be willing to purchase the output sellers desire to sell.

When the price is higher than the equilibrium price,
0 a shortage will exist.
0 quantity demanded equals quantity supplied.
0 buyers desire to purchase more than is produced.
1 sellers desire to produce and sell more than buyers wish to purchase.

Suppose that demand decreases AND supply decreases. What would you expect to occur in the market for the good?
0 Both equilibrium price and equilibrium quantity would increase.
0 Equilibrium price would decrease, but the impact on equilibrium quantity would be ambiguous.
1 Equilibrium quantity would decrease, but the impact on equilibrium price would be ambiguous.
0 Equilibrium price would increase, but the impact on equilibrium quantity would be ambiguous.

 Suppose that the incomes of buyers in a particular market for a normal good declines and there is also a reduction in input prices. What would we expect to occur in this market?
0 Both the equilibrium price and quantity would increase.
0 Equilibrium price would increase, but the impact on the amount sold in the market would be ambiguous.
1 Equilibrium price would decrease, but the impact on the amount sold in the market would be ambiguous.
0 Equilibrium quantity would increase, but the impact on equilibrium price would be ambiguous.

In a free market system, what is the mechanism for rationing scarce resources?
0 the government
1 prices
0 buyers
0 sellers

A competitive market is one in which
1 there are so many buyers and sellers that each has a negligible impact on price.
0 each seller attempts to compete so consumers cannot freely interact with sellers.
0 the government regulates each seller of the product.
0 there is only one seller of the product.

A monopolistically competitive market is one that consists of
0 a single seller of the product.
1 a large number of sellers all offering similar but different products.
0 many buyers and sellers and an identical product.
0 a few sellers that do not always compete aggressively.

All of the following are determinants of demand EXCEPT
0 tastes.
0 income.
1 technology.
0 the price of related goods.

If goods X and Y are complements, an increase in the price of X will result in
1 less of good Y sold.
0 more of good Y sold.
0 more of good X sold.
0 no difference in the quantity sold of either good.

If Diane receives an increase in her pay, we would expect Diane’s demand for
0 each good she purchases to remain unchanged.
0 for inferior goods to increase.
0 for luxury goods to decrease.
1 for normal goods to increase.

A demand curve illustrates the
0 tradeoff between inflation and unemployment.
0 positive relationship between price and quantity supplied.
1 negative relationship between price and quantity demanded.
0 maximum quantity of two goods an economy is capable of producing with available resources and technology.

Emily tells you that the price of CDs at the music store will be going down next week. You will probably respond by
1 decreasing your current demand for CDs.
0 increasing your current demand for CDs.
0 not currently changing your demand for CDs.
0 refusing to ever buy anymore CDs at that store.

A market demand curve represents the
0 average demand of all consumers in the market.
0 vertical sum of all the individual demands for a particular good or service.	
0 wishes of every supplier of a good or service in a particular market.
1 horizontal sum of all the individual demands for a particular good or service.

The willingness and ability to produce and sell a good or service is called
0 demand.
1 supply.
0 equilibrium.
0 a competitive market.

According to the law of supply, price and quantity supplied are
1 directly related.
0 inversely related.
0 independent variables.
0 the same as the relationship between price and quantity demanded.

The movement from point A to point B on the graph would be
0 a decrease in quantity supplied.
0 a decrease in supply.
0 an increase in supply.
1 an increase in quantity supplied.

A change in which of the following will cause a movement along the supply curve?
0 a change in the state of technology
0 a change in input prices
1 a change in the price of the good or service
0 a change in expectations about future prices

Bauxite is an important input in the production of aluminum. If the price of bauxite decreases, all else equal, we would expect the supply of
0 aluminum to be unaffected.
0 aluminum to decrease.
1 aluminum to increase.
0 bauxite to increase.

An improvement in the state of technology in production will result in
0 an increase in equilibrium price and an increase in equilibrium quantity.
0 a decrease in equilibrium price and a decrease in equilibrium quantity.
0 an increase in equilibrium price and no change in equilibrium quantity.
1 a decrease in equilibrium price and an increase in equilibrium quantity.

The price where quantity supplied equals quantity demanded is called the
1 equilibrium price.
0 monopoly price.
0 coordinating price.
0 All of the above are correct.

At the equilibrium price,
1 everyone in the market has been satisfied.
0 it is possible for there to be a shortage.
0 firms have an incentive to increase production.
0 buyers have an incentive to buy more.




If a market is currently experiencing a shortage at the current price, then
0 the market must be in equilibrium.
1 the price is below the equilibrium price.
0 quantity demanded equals quantity supplied.
0 sellers are producing more than buyers wish to buy because the price is too high.

Suppose oranges are currently selling for $2.00 per pound. The equilibrium price of oranges is $1.56 per pound. We would expect a
0 shortage to exist and the market price of oranges to increase.
0 shortage to exist and the market price of oranges to decrease.
0 surplus to exist and the market price of oranges to increase.
1 surplus to exist and the market price of oranges to decrease.

Suppose that the incomes of buyers in a particular market for a normal good declines and there is also a reduction in input prices. What would we expect to occur in this market?
0 The equilibrium price would increase, but the impact on the amount sold in the market would be ambiguous.
1 The equilibrium price would decrease, but the impact on the amount sold in the market would be ambiguous.
0 Both equilibrium price and equilibrium quantity would increase.
0 Equilibrium quantity would increase, but the impact on equilibrium price would be ambiguous.

A stronger demand together with a weaker supply would necessarily result in
0 a lower price.
1 a higher price.
0 an increase in equilibrium quantity.
0 a decrease in equilibrium quantity.

In a free market system, what coordinates the actions of millions of people with their varying abilities and desires?
0 producers
0 consumers
1 prices
0 the government

In general, elasticity is
0 a measure of the competitive nature of a market.
0 the friction that develops between buyer and seller in a market.
0 a measure of how much government intervention is prevalent in a market.
1 a measure of how much buyers and sellers respond to changes in market conditions.

Demand is said to be elastic if
0 the price of the good responds substantially to changes in demand.
1 the quantity demanded responds substantially to changes in the price of the good.
0 buyers don’t respond much to changes in the price of the good.
0 demand shifts substantially when the price of the good changes.

Demand for a good would tend to be more elastic, the
1 longer the period of time considered.
0 greater the availability of complements.
0 broader the definition of the market.
0 fewer substitutes there are.

Economists compute the price elasticity of demand as
0 percentage change in the price divided by the percentage change in quantity demanded.
0 change in quantity demanded divided by the change in the price.
1 percentage change in the quantity demanded divided by the percentage change in price.
0 percentage change in the quantity demanded divided by the percentage change in income.

If there are very few, if any, good substitutes for good A, then
0 supply of good A would tend to be price elastic.
1 demand for good A would tend to be price inelastic.
0 demand for good A would tend to be price elastic.
0 demand for good A would tend to be income elastic.

Suppose the price of product X is reduced from $1.45 to $1.25 and, as a result, the quantity of X demanded increases from 2,000 to 2,200. Using the midpoint method, the price elasticity of demand for X in the given price range is
1 0.64.
0 1.00.
0 1.55.
0 2.00.

The main reason for using the midpoint method is that it
0 uses fewer numbers.
0 rounds prices to the nearest dollar.
1 gives the same answer regardless of the direction of change.
0 rounds quantities to the nearest whole unit.

If the demand curve is linear and downward sloping, which of the following would NOT be correct?
0 Elasticity will change with a movement down the curve.
0 The upper part of the demand curve is more elastic than the lower part.
0 The lower part of the demand curve would be less elastic than the upper part.
1 Elasticity and slope would both remain constant along the curve.

Demand is elastic if elasticity is
0 equal to 0.
0 equal to 1.
0 less than 1.
1 greater than 1.



A perfectly elastic demand implies that
0 buyers will not respond to any change in price.
0 price and quantity demanded respond proportionally.
0 price will rise by an infinite amount when there is a change in quantity demanded.
1 any rise in price above that represented by the demand curve will result in no output demanded.

On a downward-sloping, linear demand curve, total revenue would be at a maximum at the
0 upper end of the demand curve.
1 midpoint of the demand curve.
0 lower end of the demand curve.
0 It is impossible to tell without knowing the price and quantity demanded.

When demand is inelastic, a decrease in price will cause
0 no change in total revenue.
0 an increase in total revenue.
1 a decrease in total revenue.
0 There is insufficient information to answer this question.

The local pizza restaurant makes such great bread sticks that consumers do not respond much to a change in the price. If the owner is only interested in increasing revenue, he should
0 reduce costs.
0 lower the price of the bread sticks.
1 raise the price of the bread sticks.
0 leave the price of the bread sticks alone.

If a change in the price of a good results in no change in total revenue,
0 the demand for the good must be elastic.
1 the demand for the good must be unit elastic.
0 the demand for the good must be inelastic.
0 buyers must not respond very much to a change in price.

Assume that a 4 percent increase in income results in a 2 percent increase in the quantity demanded of a good. The income elasticity of demand for the good is
1 positive and therefore the good is a normal good.
0 negative and therefore the good is an inferior good.
0 negative and therefore the good is a normal good.
0 positive and therefore the good is an inferior good.

Cross-price elasticity of demand measures how the
0 quantity demanded of a good changes as price changes.
0 quantity demanded of a good changes as income changes.
0 price of a good is affected when income changes.
1 quantity demanded of one good changes as the price of another good changes.

The price elasticity of supply measures how much
1 the quantity supplied responds to changes in the price of the good.
0 the quantity supplied responds to changes in input prices.
0 the price of the good responds to changes in supply.
0 sellers respond to changes in technology.

The main determinant of the price elasticity of supply is
1 time.
0 luxuries vs. necessities.
0 the definition of the market.
0 the number of close substitutes.

Suppose that an increase in the price of carrots from $1.20 to $1.40 per pound raises the amount of carrots that carrot farmers are willing to supply from 1.2 million pounds to 1.6 million pounds. Using the midpoint method, what would be the elasticity of supply?
0 0.50
0 0.54
1 1.86
0 2.00

If the elasticity of supply of a product is greater than 1, then supply is
0 inelastic.
1 elastic.
0 unit elastic.
0 not very sensitive to change in price.

Supply tends to be
0 less price elastic in the long run.
0 perfectly price inelastic in the long run.
1 more price elastic in the long run.
0 perfectly price inelastic in the long run.

A vertical supply curve signifies that
0 an infinite quantity will be supplied at a given price.
1 a change in price will have no effect on quantity supplied.
0 the relationship between price and quantity supplied is inverse.
0 a change in price will change quantity supplied in the opposite direction.

Suppose a producer is able to separate customers into two groups, one having a price inelastic demand and the other having a price elastic demand. If the producer’s objective is to increase total revenue, she should
0 charge the same price to both groups of customers.
0 increase the price for both groups of customers.
0 increase the price charged to customers with the price elastic demand and decrease the price charged to customers with the price inelastic demand.
1 decrease the price charged to customers with the price elastic demand and increase the price charged to customers with the price inelastic demand.

The elasticity of demand measures
0 the increase in demand as additional buyers enter the market.
1 a buyer’s responsiveness to a change in the price of a good.
0 how much less of a good consumers will demand when incomes fall.
0 the increase in supply that will occur from an increase in the price of a good.

Demand is said to be inelastic if
1 consumers hardly respond to a change in price.
0 consumers respond substantially to a change in price.
0 consumers respond directly to a change in income.
0 the change in quantity demanded is equal to the change in price.

The elasticity of demand for luxuries tends to be
0 greater than 1.
0 equal to 1.
1 less than 1.
0 equal to 0.

Milky Way candy bars tend to have an elastic demand because
0 the candy bar market is too broadly defined.
1 there are many close substitutes for Milky Ways.
0 Milky Ways are considered by some to be a necessity.
0 it is usually eaten quickly and therefore the time horizon is short.

Economists compute elasticity using the midpoint method primarily because it
0 is the simplest method to compute elasticity.
0 uses the same equation that is used to compute slope.
0 automatically rounds quantities to the nearest whole unit.
1 gives the same answer regardless of the direction of change.

Demand is elastic if elasticity is
0 equal to 1.
0 equal to 0.	
0 less than 1.
1 greater than 1.

A demand curve that is a downward-sloping straight line will have
0 a positive slope.
1 higher elasticity at the top than at the bottom.
0 lower elasticity at the top than at the bottom.
0 constant elasticity throughout its length.

When the price of Pokemon cards are $.50, the quantity demanded is 400 cards per day. When the price falls to $.40, the quantity demanded increases to 600. Given this information and using the midpoint method, you know that the demand for Pokemon cards is
1 elastic.
0 inelastic.
0 unit elastic.
0 perfectly inelastic.

A perfectly inelastic demand is
1 vertical because buyers purchase the same amount whether the price rises or falls.
0 negatively sloped because buyers decrease their purchases when the price rises.
0 positively sloped because buyers respond by increasing their purchases when price rises.
0 horizontal because buyers increase their purchases by huge amounts with slight changes in price.

Total revenue changes as one moves down a linear demand curve by
0 decreasing.
0 increasing.
0 decreasing, then increasing.
1 increasing, then decreasing.

If the demand for bagels is elastic, an increase in the price of bagels will
0 increase total revenue of bagel sellers.
1 decrease total revenue of bagel sellers.
0 not change total revenue of bagel sellers.
0 There is not enough information to answer this question.

Corporation XYZ has a linear demand curve for its product. The company is currently producing on the lower portion of its demand curve. Increasing the price of the product will
0 not affect the company’s total revenue.
1 increase the company’s total revenue.
0 decrease the company’s total revenue.
0 increase the company’s total cost of production.

When a change in the price of a good results in no change in total revenue you know that the demand for this product is
0 elastic.
0 perfectly inelastic.
0 inelastic.
1 unit elastic.

If a 6 percent increase in income results in a 3 percent decrease in the quantity demanded of macaroni, then the income elasticity of demand for macaroni is
1 negative and therefore macaroni is an inferior good.
0 negative and therefore macaroni is a normal good.
0 positive and therefore macaroni is an inferior good.
0 positive and therefore macaroni is a normal good.

The cross-price elasticity of demand determines whether goods are
0 normal or inferior.
0 elastic or inelastic.
0 luxuries or necessities.
1 complements or substitutes.

The price elasticity of supply measures how responsive
1 sellers are to a change in price.
0 buyers are to a change in price.
0 buyers are to a change in income.
0 sellers are to a change in buyers’ income.


The price elasticity of supply for a good will be greater (more elastic) the
0 more necessary the good is considered.
0 broader the market is defined.
0 more close substitutes the good has.
1 longer the time period being considered.

If two supply curves pass through the same point and one is steep and the other is flat, which of the following would be correct?
1 The flatter supply curve is more elastic.
0 The steeper supply curve is more elastic.
0 The elasticity of supply will be the same for both curves.
0 It is impossible to tell the elasticity of supply for either curve unless you are given actual numbers to compute the elasticity of both curves.

A vertical supply curve tells us that
1 suppliers will not respond to a change in price.
0 an infinite quantity will be supplied at a given price.
0 suppliers will refuse to sell the product at the current market price.
0 if the price of the product increases quantity supplied will decrease substantially.

If the elasticity of supply of a product is 0.5, then we know that supply is
0 elastic.
1 inelastic.
0 unit elastic.
0 perfectly inelastic.

Knowing that the demand for wheat is inelastic, if wheat farmers wanted to increase their total revenue they should all
0 plant more wheat so that they would be able to sell more each year.
0 increase spending on fertilizer in an attempt to produce more on the acres they farm.
1 voluntarily plow under a certain percent of their wheat crop to raise the price.
0 advertise in an attempt to get consumers to buy more wheat.

A firm would be willing to supply 500 frisbees per day at a price of $3.00 each. At a price of $5.00 each the firm would be willing to supply 1100 frisbees. Using the midpoint method, the elasticity of supply would be
0 0.67.
0 0.75.
0 1.0.
1 1.5.

You have just been hired as a business consultant to determine what pricing policy would be appropriate in order to increase the total revenue of a clothing store. The first step you would take is to
0 increase the prices of the store’s products.
0 look for ways to cut costs and increase profit for the store.
1 determine the elasticity of demand for the store’s products.
0 suggest that the store purchase an entirely new line of clothing that they could sell more cheaply.

“A number of mass transit systems have been experiencing declining revenues despite fare increases.” Assuming that the demand for mass transit has not changed (i.e., that the demand curve has not shifted), the above statement implies that
1 the demand for mass transit is elastic with respect to price.
0 the demand for mass transit is inelastic with respect to price.
0 mass transit is an inferior good.
0 revenues would have risen only if fares had been increased by a larger amount.

Price controls are
0 established by firms with monopoly power.
0 used to make markets more efficient.
0 nearly always effective in eliminating inequities.
1 usually enacted when policymakers believe that the market price of a good or service is unfair to buyers or sellers.

A legal minimum price at which a good can be sold is a price
0 cut.
1 floor.
0 ceiling.
0 stabilization.

If a price ceiling is a binding constraint on the market,
0 the forces of supply and demand must be in equilibrium.
0 the equilibrium price must be below the price ceiling.
1 the equilibrium price must be above the price ceiling.
0 it will have no effect on supply or demand.

A binding price ceiling is imposed on the market for peaches. At the ceiling price, the quantity demanded of peaches will be
1 greater than the quantity supplied.
0 smaller than the quantity supplied.
0 equal to the quantity supplied.
0 artificially restricted by the price ceiling.

A binding price ceiling will make it necessary to
0 supply more of the product.
0 increase demand for the product, because there will be a surplus.
0 develop a better marketing plan, because there will be a surplus.
1 develop a way of rationing the product, because there will be a shortage.



A price floor is binding if it is
0 set by the government.
1 higher than the equilibrium market price.
0 lower than the equilibrium market price.
0 equal to the equilibrium market price.

The minimum wage is an example of
1 a price floor.
0 a price ceiling.
0 a free-market process.
0 an efficient labor allocation mechanism.

If the minimum wage is above the equilibrium wage,
0 anyone who wants a job at the minimum wage can find one.
0 the quantity demanded of labor will be greater than the quantity supplied.
0 the quantity demanded of labor will equal the quantity supplied.
1 the quantity demanded of labor will be less than the quantity supplied.

The term tax incidence refers to the
0 Boston Tea Party.
0 “flat tax” movement.
0 division of the tax burden between sales taxes and income taxes.
1 division of the tax burden between buyers and sellers.






A tax on the buyers of popcorn
1 reduces the size of the popcorn market.
0 increases the size of the popcorn market.
0 has no effect on the size of the popcorn market.
0 may increase, decrease, or have no effect on the size of the popcorn market.

A tax on the sellers of popcorn
0 causes the supply curve to shift to the right.
1 leads sellers to supply a smaller quantity at every price.
0 leads buyers to demand a smaller quantity at every price.
0 leads sellers to supply a larger quantity at every price.

A tax of $.10 per bag on the sellers of popcorn will cause the
1 supply curve of popcorn to shift up by $.10 per bag.
0 supply curve of popcorn to shift down by $.05 per bag.
0 demand curve of popcorn to shift up by $.10 per bag.
0 supply curve of popcorn to shift down by $.10 per bag.

A tax on the sellers of popcorn will
0 reduce the equilibrium price of popcorn, and increase the equilibrium quantity.
0 reduce the equilibrium price of popcorn, and reduce the equilibrium quantity.
1 increase the equilibrium price of popcorn, and reduce the equilibrium quantity.
0 increase the equilibrium price of popcorn, and increase the equilibrium quantity.

A tax on the sellers of popcorn will cause the price the buyers pay
0 and the effective price the sellers receive to rise.
0 and the effective price the sellers receive to fall.
0 to fall, and the price the sellers receive to rise.
1 to rise, and the effective price the sellers receive to fall.

What is true about the burden of a tax imposed on popcorn?
0 Sellers bear the entire burden of the tax.
0 Buyers bear the entire burden of the tax.
1 Buyers and sellers share the burden of the tax.
0 The government bears the entire burden of the tax.

The key feature of a payroll tax is that it
0 is a tax on corporations.
0 is a tax on poor people.
0 does not affect equilibrium in labor markets.
1 places a wedge between the wage that firms pay and the wage that workers receive.

If a tax is imposed on a market with inelastic demand and elastic supply,
0 sellers will bear most of the burden of the tax.
1 buyers will bear most of the burden of the tax.
0 the burden of the tax will be shared equally between buyers and sellers.
0 it is impossible to determine how the burden of the tax will be shared.

Which of the following is the most correct statement about tax burdens?
0 A tax burden falls most heavily on the side of the market that is closer to unit elastic.
0 A tax burden is distributed independently of relative elasticities of supply and demand.
0 A tax burden falls most heavily on the side of the market that is elastic.
1 A tax burden falls most heavily on the side of the market that is inelastic.

When policymakers choose to enact price controls in a market, they do so because
1 they believe the market’s outcome to be unfair.
0 enacting price controls will directly increase tax revenues.
0 they are required by law to improve market conditions.
0 they believe that the market system is inefficient and their actions will improve efficiency.

A government-imposed maximum price at which a good can be sold is called a price
0 floor.
1 ceiling.
0 support.
0 equilibrium.

If a price ceiling is not binding, it will
0 cause a surplus in the market.
0 cause a shortage in the market.
0 cause the market price to fluctuate.
1 have no effect on the market price.

If a binding price ceiling is imposed in the market for gasoline,
0 there will be a surplus of gasoline in the market.
0 the price of gasoline will be legally forced toward equilibrium price.
1 there will be a shortage of gasoline in the market.
0 market forces will guarantee that the price will be at equilibrium.



A common example of a price ceiling is
0 farm price supports.
0 the minimum wage.
1 rent control.
0 income taxes.

Price controls such as price ceilings and price floors
0 are desirable because they make markets more efficient as well as equitable.
1 cause surpluses and shortages to persist since price cannot adjust to the market equilibrium price.
0 can be enacted to restore a market to equilibrium.
0 are imposed because they can make the poor in the economy better off without causing adverse effects.

If the government establishes a legal price floor for a good, the result will be a
0 shortage of the good, but only if the floor is equal to the equilibrium price.
1 surplus of the good, but only if the floor is above the equilibrium price.
0 surplus of the good, but only if the floor is below the equilibrium price.
0 shortage of the good, but only if the floor is above the equilibrium price.	

When minimum wage laws are established, employers must
0 pay the going (equilibrium) wage in the market.
1 pay a wage equal to, or higher than, the minimum wage.
0 hire a minimum number of employees, which is set by the government.
0 hire only those workers who will work for the established minimum wage..

Tax incidence deals with
0 the level of taxable income.
1 who bears the burden of a tax.
0 the level of taxation on sales.
0 the dollar amount of incidental taxes.






A tax placed on the buyers of a product will
0 reduce the equilibrium price and increase the equilibrium quantity of that product.
0 reduce the equilibrium price and equilibrium quantity of that product.
0 increase the equilibrium price and equilibrium quantity of that product.
1 increase the equilibrium price and reduce the equilibrium quantity of that product.

When a tax is imposed on the buyers of a product, the burden of the tax falls
0 entirely on the buyers.
0 entirely on the sellers.
0 entirely on the government.
1 on both the buyers and the sellers.

A tax placed on the sellers of a product has an initial impact on
1 the supply of the product.
0 the demand for the product.
0 both the product supply and demand.
0 Taxes do not impact demand and supply.

Payroll taxes cause wages received by workers to
1 fall and wages paid by firms to rise.
0 fall and wages paid by firms to fall.
0 rise and wage paid by firms to fall.
0 rise and wage paid by firms to rise.

In the final analysis, tax incidence is determined by
0 the size of the tax imposed.
1 the forces of supply and demand.
0 trial and error.
0 the policymakers who wrote the tax law.

Buyers of a product will pay most of the burden of a tax if
1 supply is more elastic than demand.
0 the demand is more elastic than supply.
0 the tax is placed on the seller of the product.
0 the tax is placed on the buyer of the product.

A tax placed on the sellers of a product will shift the
0 supply curve to the right.
1 supply curve to the left.
0 demand curve to the left.
0 demand curve to the right.

Which of the following statements is correct?
0 	It is relatively easy to legislate the burden of a tax.
0 If supply is relatively elastic, sellers will bear more of the incidence of a tax.
1 A tax will have the same incidence whether it is placed on the buyer or the seller.
0 If government makes buyers pay a tax on a good, the buyers are made worse off while the sellers are made better off.


Welfare economics is the study of
0 the well-being of less fortunate people.
0 welfare programs in the United States.
0 the effect of income redistribution on work effort.
1 how the allocation of resources affects economic well-being.

The equilibrium of supply and demand in a market
0 maximizes the profits of producers.
0 minimizes the costs incurred by consumers.
1 maximizes the total benefits received by buyers and sellers.
0 minimizes the expenditures of buyers.

The area below a demand curve and above the price measures
0 total surplus.
0 producer surplus.
0 willingness to pay.
1 consumer surplus.

Willingness to pay measures the
1 maximum amount that a buyer will pay for a good.
0 amount a seller actually receives for a good minus the minimum amount the seller is willing to accept.
0 maximum amount a buyer is willing to pay minus the minimum amount a seller is willing to accept.
0 amount a buyer is willing to pay for a good minus the amount the buyer actually pays for it.

If a consumer is willing and able to pay $15.50 for a particular good but the price of the good is $16.00, then the
0 market must not be a perfectly competitive market.
0 consumer would have consumer surplus of $0.50.
1 consumer would not purchase the good and would not have any consumer surplus.
0 consumer would increase his/her willingness and ability to pay by earning more.

If Brock is willing to pay $500 for a new suit, but is able to buy the suit for $350, his consumer surplus is
0 $850.
0 $500.
0 $350.
1 $150.

Sharon values a lawnmower at $300, but buys it for $200. Sharon’s willingness to pay is
0 $500.
1 $300.
0 $200.
0 $100.

Consumer surplus is the
0 quantity of a good consumers get free.
0 total value of a good to a consumer.
1 amount a consumer is willing to pay less the amount the consumer actually pays.
0 amount a consumer has to pay less the amount the consumer was willing to pay.

If you pay a price exactly equal to your willingness to pay, then
0 you place little value on the good.
1 your consumer surplus is $0.
0 your consumer surplus is negative.
0 your willingness to pay is less than your consumer surplus.


Consumer surplus equals
0 Value to buyers – Costs of sellers.
1 Value to buyers – Amount paid by buyers.
0 Amount received by sellers – Costs of sellers.
0 Value to buyers – Amount paid by buyers + Amount received by sellers – Costs of sellers.

Cost is a measure of the
0 producer shortage.
1 seller’s willingness to sell.
0 seller’s producer surplus.
0 seller’s willingness to buy.

Producer surplus is the
1 amount a seller is paid less the cost of production.
0 cost to sellers of participating in a market.
0 amount represented by the area under the supply curve.
0 area under the supply curve to the left of the amount sold.

The marginal seller is the seller who
0 can produce at the lowest cost.
0 has the greatest producer surplus.
0 cannot compete with the other sellers in the market.
1 would leave the market first if the price were any lower.

Producer surplus is the area
0 under the supply curve.
1 below the price and above the supply curve.
0 between the supply and demand curves.
0 under the demand curve, and above the price.



Producer surplus measures the
0 loss to sellers.
1 well-being of sellers.
0 well-being of society as a whole.
0 well-being of buyers and sellers.

Donald produces nails at a cost of $200 per ton. If he sells the nails for $500 per ton, his producer surplus is
0 $700 per ton.
0 $500 per ton.
1 $300 per ton.
0 $200 per ton.

If Dale sells a shirt for $40, and his producer surplus from the sale is $23, his cost must have been
1 $17.
0 $23.
0 $40.
0 $63.

We can say that the allocation of resources is efficient if
1 total surplus is maximized.
0 consumer surplus is maximized.
0 producer surplus is maximized.
0 None of the above is correct.

Total surplus in a market equals
0 Value to buyers – Amount paid by buyers.
1 Value to buyers – Costs of sellers.
0 Amount received by sellers – Costs of sellers.
0 Amount received by sellers – Amount paid by buyers.

The “invisible hand” refers to the
0 automatic maximization of consumer surplus in free markets.
0 marketplace as a place where government looks out for the self-interests of individual participants in the market.
0 equity that results from market forces allocating the goods produced in the market.
1 marketplace guiding the self-interests of market participants into promoting general economic well-being.

Economists refer to the study of how the allocation of resources affects economic well-being as
0 economic policy.
1 welfare economics.
0 market efficiency.
0 Keynesian economics.

With respect to welfare economics, the equilibrium price of a product is considered to be the best price because it
0 maximizes tax revenue to the government.
0 minimizes costs and maximizes profits of sellers.
1 maximizes the total welfare of buyers and sellers.
0 minimizes the level of welfare payments to those who no longer live below the poverty line.

The height of a demand curve represents the
0 cost of the marginal seller.
0 cost of the highest-cost sellers.
1 marginal buyer’s willingness to pay.
0 minimum amount the marginal buyer will be willing to pay for a specific quantity of a good.

When we measure a buyer’s willingness to pay, we are measuring
1 how much the buyer values a good.
0 the buyer’s consumer surplus.
0 the dollar amount a buyer has to pay to obtain a good.
0 how much of the purchase price a seller receives as profit from the sale of a good.

Al is willing to pay $40.00 for a video of the movie Castaways. He finds a copy at his favorite video store for $15. Al’s consumer surplus is
0 $15.
1 $25.
0 $40.
0 $55.

Julie buys a new pair of boots for $100. She receives a consumer surplus of $25 on her purchase. Her willingness to pay is
0 $25.
0 $75.
0 $100.
1 $125.

A definition for consumer surplus would be
0 the amount of a product a consumer can buy at a price below the equilibrium price.
1 the difference between the amount a consumer has to pay and the amount the consumer was willing to pay.
0 the number of consumers who are excluded from a market because of scarcity.
0 how much a buyer values a good.

If the price of the product is equal to a consumer’s willingness to pay, then the consumer surplus of that purchase would be
0 zero, and the consumer would not purchase the product.
0 negative, and the consumer would not purchase the product.
1 zero, but the consumer would purchase the product.
0 There is not enough information given to answer this question.

Consumer surplus is measured graphically as the area
0 between the demand and supply curves.
1 below the demand curve and above price.
0 below the price and above the supply curve.
0 below the demand curve to the right of equilibrium price.

What will happen to consumer surplus if the price of a good falls?
1 It increases.
0 It decreases.
0 It is unchanged.
0 It may increase, decrease, or remain unchanged, depending on how much the price fell.

Producer surplus is the
0 area under the demand curve above price.
1 amount a seller is paid less the cost of production.
0 cost producers incur when they choose to participate in the market.
0 total area under the supply curve that is to the left of equilibrium quantity.

A seller would be willing to sell a product ONLY IF the price received is
0 equal to the cost of production.
0 at least double the cost of production.
0 less than the cost of production.
1 at least as great as the cost of production.

An increase in the price of a good will cause
0 both producer and consumer surplus to increase.
0 both producer and consumer surplus to decrease.
1 an increase in producer surplus and a decrease in consumer surplus.
0 a decrease in producer surplus and an increase in consumer surplus.

Producer surplus can be defined as the
0 Value to buyers – Costs of sellers.
0 Value to buyers – Amount paid by buyers.
1 Amount received by sellers – Costs of sellers.
0 Value to buyers – Amount paid by buyers + Amount received by sellers – Costs of sellers.

Denea produces greeting cards. Her production cost is $2 per box. She sells the cards for $8 per box. Her producer surplus is
0 $2 per box.
1 $6 per box.
0 $8 per box.
0 $10 per box.

Total surplus in a market is equal to
1 producer surplus plus consumer surplus.
0 the total costs to sellers less the total value to buyers.
0 consumers’ willingness to pay plus producer costs.
0 an amount greater than consumer surplus plus producer surplus.








The “invisible hand” is a term used
0 to describe the welfare system in the United States.
0 to describe the way illegal drugs enter a country.
1 by Adam Smith to describe the virtues of free markets.
0 by some economists to describe what the role of government should be in an economy—present but invisible.

Markets will NOT allocate resources efficiently if
1 there are externalities.
0 there is perfect competition.
0 there are many buyers and sellers.
0 the market is allowed to reach equilibrium.

A tax levied on the buyers of a product shifts the
0 demand curve upward or to the right.
1 demand curve downward or to the left.
0 supply curve upward or to the left.
0 supply curve downward or to the right.

When a tax is levied on a good
0 buyers are worse off but sellers are not.
0 sellers are worse off but buyers are not.
0 neither buyers nor sellers are worse off.
1 both buyers and sellers are worse off.

When a tax on a good is enacted,
0 sellers always bear the full burden of the tax.
0 buyers always bear the full burden of the tax.
1 buyers and sellers share the burden of the tax regardless of which party it is levied on.
0 sellers bear the full burden if the tax is levied on them, but buyers bear the full burden if the tax is levied on them.

A tax placed on a good
0 causes the price of the good to fall.
1 causes the size of the market for the good to shrink.
0 affects buyers of the good, but not sellers.
0 is usually borne entirely by the seller of the good.

When a tax is levied on a good
0 the market price falls because demand declines.
0 the market price falls because supply falls.
0 the market price rises because demand falls.
1 a wedge is placed between the price buyers pay and the price sellers receive.

The benefit received by the sellers of a good in a market is measured by
1 producer surplus.
0 consumer surplus.
0 the amount it costs producers to produce the good.
0 the amount buyers pay for the good in excess of the amount the good is actually worth.











Deadweight loss is the
0 decline in government revenue when taxes are reduced in a market.
1 reduction in total surplus that results from a tax.
0 reduction in consumer surplus when a tax is placed on buyers.
0 loss of profit to businesses when a tax is imposed.

The greater the elasticities of demand and supply the
0 smaller the deadweight loss from a tax.
1 greater the deadweight loss from a tax.
0 less intrusive a tax will be on a market.	
0 more equitable the distribution of a tax between buyers and sellers.

Economists generally agree that the most important tax in the U.S. economy is the tax on
1 labor.
0 consumption.
0 personal property.
0 income.

If the supply of land is fixed, a tax on land would be paid
0 only by workers.
1 entirely by the landowners.
0 entirely by the renters or users of the land.
0 partly by landowners and partly by land users.

As the size of a tax increases
0 the deadweight loss from the tax remains constant.
0 the deadweight loss from the tax declines.
1 the deadweight loss from the tax increases.
0 no one knows how the deadweight loss changes because no tax has ever been reduced.

One side-effect of the tax cuts made during Ronald Reagan’s terms as president was
0 increased tax revenues.
1 large budget deficits.
0 small budget surpluses.
0 decreased government spending.

The views held by Arthur Laffer and Ronald Reagan that cuts in tax rates would encourage people to increase the quantity of labor they supplied became known as
0 Laffer economics.
0 welfare economics.
0 microeconomics.
1 supply-side economics.

The higher a country’s tax rates the more likely that country will be
0 above the Laffer curve.
0 on the top of the Laffer curve.
1 on the negatively-sloped part of the Laffer curve.
0 on the positively-sloped part of the Laffer curve.

A major political problem with collecting taxes to finance government spending is that
0 taxes make taxpayers worse off since government spending benefits no one.
1 the people who pay the taxes are often not the same people who benefit from the government spending of tax funds.
0 taxes make taxpayers worse off since government spending benefits only those on welfare.
0 taxes reduce economic welfare more than the expenditure of tax funds benefits society.

The effect of a tax placed on a good will be to
0 lower both the price buyers pay and the price sellers receive.
0 raise both the price buyers pay and the price sellers receive.
1 raise the price buyers pay and lower the price sellers receive.
0 lower the price buyers pay and raise the price sellers receive.

If a tax is levied on the supplier of a product, the
1 supply curve will shift upward or to the left.
0 supply curve will shift downward or to the right.
0 demand curve will shift upward or to the right.
0 demand curve will shift downward or to the left.

Ultimately, it does not matter whether a tax is levied on the buyer or seller of the good because
0 sellers always bear the full burden of the tax.
0 buyers always bear the full burden of the tax.
1 buyers and sellers will share the burden of the tax.
0 sellers bear the full burden if the tax is levied on them, and buyers bear the full burden if the tax is levied on them.

A tax on a good will affect welfare because it
1 affects the behavior of buyers and sellers.
0 causes the market to expand production beyond the optimum quantity.
0 causes sellers to produce more than they would in the absence of the tax.
0 causes buyers to purchase more than they would in the absence of the tax.

The term used by economists for the benefit received by buyers in a market is
0 producer surplus.
1 consumer surplus.
0 total expenditures.
0 willingness to pay.

Deadweight loss refers to the
0 transfer of resources from buyers to sellers.
1 decrease in total surplus that results from a tax.
0 increase in producer surplus that results from a tax.
0 decrease in government revenue that occurs when a tax rate is increased beyond its optimum.












What determines the amount of deadweight loss that will result from a tax?
1 the price elasticity of demand and supply
0 the number of buyers of the product in the market
0 the number of suppliers of the product in the market
0 the percentage of the purchase price the tax amounts to

Assume that the demand for potato chips is relatively inelastic and that the demand for Snickers is relatively elastic. If the same percentage tax were placed on both goods, the tax on which product would create a larger deadweight loss?
0 the tax on potato chips
1 the tax on Snickers
0 The taxes would create the same amount of deadweight loss.
0 This question is impossible to answer without knowing the price of both potato chips and Snickers.

Which of the following is generally considered to be the most important tax in the U.S. economy?
0 the income tax
1 the tax on labor
0 the inheritance or death tax
0 corporate profit taxes

Taxes imposed on labor will encourage each of the following EXCEPT
1 overtime.
0 stay-at-home mothers.
0 early retirement by older workers.
0 under-the-table payments to workers.

The result of a tax placed on land would be
0 a huge deadweight tax loss.
1 no deadweight tax loss.
0 that landlords would not have to bear any of the burden of the tax.
0 that enough tax revenue would be raised by the government that all other taxes could be eliminated.

If the size of a tax is tripled, the deadweight loss from the tax would
0 double.
0 triple.
0 increase by six times.
1 increase by nine times.

Ronald Reagan and Arthur Laffer both believed that reducing income tax rates would
0 increase the national debt.
0 decrease government tax collections.
1 increase government tax collections.
0 not change the amount of revenue the government collected.

Critics of supply-side economics suggest that substantial tax cuts would lead to
0 significant recession.
0 minor inflationary increases.
1 large government deficits.
0 taxpayer revolts.

When the United States engages in international trade with China,
0 it is an equal tradeoff so neither country benefits nor loses.
0 China reaps economic benefits and the United States loses.
1 both China and the United States reap economic benefits.
0 China loses and the United States reaps economic benefits.

Countries usually impose restrictions on free foreign trade to protect
0 domestic consumers.
0 foreign consumers.
0 foreign producers.
1 domestic producers.

If a country allows trade and the domestic price of a good is higher than the world price,
1 the country will become an importer of the good.
0 the country will become an exporter of the good.
0 the country will neither export nor import the good.
0 additional information about demand is needed to determine whether the country will export or import the good.

A country has a comparative advantage in a product if the world price is
0 equal to its domestic price.
1 higher than its domestic price.
0 lower than its domestic price.
0 There is no way to tell by comparing the world price with the domestic price.

When a country allows trade and becomes an exporter of a good,
0 both domestic producers and domestic consumers are better off.
0 both domestic producers and domestic consumers are worse off.
1 domestic producers are better off, and domestic consumers are worse off.
0 domestic producers are worse off, and domestic consumers are better off.

When a country allows trade and becomes an importer of a good,
0 everyone in the country benefits.
0 everyone in the country loses.
0 the losses of the losers exceed the gains of the winners.
1 the gains of the winners exceed the losses of the losers.

When a country allows free trade,
1 the domestic price will equal the world price.
0 the domestic price will be lower than the world price.
0 the domestic price will be greater than the world price.
0 it does not matter what the world price is, the domestic price is the prevailing price.

According to this scenario, if trade in pineapple is allowed, the price of pineapple in the United States
0 will decrease.
1 will increase.
0 will be unaffected.
0 could increase or decrease.

According to this scenario, if trade in pineapple is allowed, total well-being in the United States
0 will decrease.
1 will increase.
0 will be unaffected.
0 could increase or decrease.







A tariff on a product makes domestic sellers
0 better off and domestic buyers better off.
0 worse off and domestic buyers better off.
1 better off and domestic buyers worse off.
0 worse off and domestic buyers worse off.

As a result of the tariff the U.S. price of pillows will be
0 $25 and the quantity of pillows purchased will increase.
0 $35 and the quantity of pillows purchased will increase.
0 $25 and the quantity of pillows purchased will decrease.
1 $35 and the quantity of pillows purchased will decrease.



When a quota is imposed on a market the
0 supply curve (above the world price) shifts to the left by the amount of the quota.
1 supply curve (above the world price) shifts to the right by the amount of the quota.
0 demand curve (above the world price) shifts to the right by the amount of the quota.
0 demand curve (above the world price) shifts to the left by the amount of the quota.

A tariff and an import quota will both
0 increase the quantity of imports and raise domestic price.
0 increase the quantity of imports and lower domestic price.
0 reduce the quantity of imports and lower domestic price.
1 reduce the quantity of imports and raise domestic price.



Which of the following is NOT an argument for restricting trade?
0 the jobs argument
1 the efficiency argument
0 the infant-industry argument
0 the national security argument

The North American Free Trade Agreement
0 increased trade restrictions among Canada, Mexico and the United States.
1 reduced trade restrictions among Canada, Mexico and the United States.
0 eliminated tariffs on imports to North America from the rest of the world.
0 reduced trade restrictions among European countries.

When two countries choose to engage in international trade,
1 both countries will benefit.
0 one country benefits while the other country loses.
0 since it is an equal exchange, neither country benefits nor loses.
0 Without additional information, we will not be able to know if either country benefits or loses.

When a country’s domestic price of a product is lower than the world price and free trade is allowed,
0 the country will become an importer of the product.
1 the country will become an exporter of the product.
0 we know that consumers must not demand the product since the domestic price is lower, so the country will have no need to export nor import the product.
0 additional information about domestic supply is needed to determine whether the country will export or import the good.

When the world price of a product is higher than a country’s domestic price we know that the country
0 should import that product.
0 should no longer produce that product.
1 has a comparative advantage in that product.
0 could benefit by imposing a tariff on that product.

When countries import a product, domestic producers
0 and domestic consumers of that product both benefit.
0 benefit but domestic consumers lose.
1 lose but domestic consumers benefit.
0 and domestic consumers both lose.

When a country becomes an exporter of a good,
0 everyone in the country benefits.
0 everyone in the country loses.
0 the losses of the losers exceed the gains of the winners.
1 	the gains of the winners exceed the losses of the losers.	

For a country, the domestic price of a product will equal the world price
0 when the domestic supply of the product increases.
1 when the country allows free trade.
0 when trade restrictions are imposed on the product.
0 if the country chooses to export and not import the product.

If Chile allows trade in soybeans Chile will
0 import soybeans and the price in Chile will be $3.00 per bushel.
0 import soybeans and the price in Chile will be $2.50 per bushel.
1 export soybeans and the price in Chile will be $3.00 per bushel.
0 export soybeans and the price in Chile will be $2.50 per bushel.

With free trade in the soybean market in Chile, consumers
0 and producers will both lose.
0 and producers will both benefit.
1 will lose and producers will benefit.
0 will benefit and producers will not be affected.







A tariff is a tax on
0 exported goods that lowers the domestic price below the world price.
0 exported goods that keeps the domestic price the same as the world price.
0 imported goods that lowers the domestic price below the world price.
1 imported goods that raises the domestic price above the world price.

According to this scenario, if Holland imposes a $15 tariff on scanners, the result in Holland would be that the price of scanners will be
1 $125 and the quantity purchased will fall.
0 $110 and the quantity purchased will fall.
0 $95 and the quantity purchased will increase.
0 $125 and the quantity purchased will increase.

According to this scenario, if Holland imposes a $15 tariff on scanners, the result in Holland would be that consumers
0 and producers will both gain.
0 and producers will both lose.
0 will gain and producers will lose.
1 will lose and producers will gain.




From the importing country’s point of view, a tariff is better than a quota because
0 a tariff has a smaller effect on imports than does a quota.
0 a tariff has a larger effect on imports than does a quota.
1 the tariff generates tax revenue for the government.
0 both reduce imports but only quotas increase price.



All of the following are used as arguments against free trade EXCEPT
1 free trade makes consumers worse off.
0 free trade can threaten national security.
0 free trade can destroy domestic jobs.
0 infant industries must be protected from free trade.

The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)
1 was enacted to lower trade barriers among European countries.
0 was enacted to lower trade barriers among the United States, Canada and Mexico.
0 was enacted after World War I in response to high tariffs imposed during the war.
0 is a series of continuing negotiations that has the goal of promoting free trade.

In the absence of externalities the invisible hand of the marketplace
0 induces people to act in a manner inconsistent with self-interest.
0 is unable to resolve inherent inefficiencies in the market system.
1 leads to a market outcome that maximizes total benefit to society.
0 increases the transactions cost of contracting between parties to an exchange.

An externality exists when
0 a firm sells its product in a foreign market.
0 markets are not able to reach equilibrium.
0 the government intercedes in the operation of private markets by forcing the market to adjust to the balance of supply and demand.
1 a person engages in an activity that influences the well-being of a bystander and yet neither pays nor receives payment for that effect.

An externality will
0 cause markets to allocate resources efficiently.
1 usually be characterized as a form of market failure.
0 strengthen the role of the “invisible hand” in the marketplace.
0 always require the producer to compensate society.

An optimal tax on pollution (a negative production externality) would be one in which
0 a benevolent social planner is able to maximize production.
1 producers internalize the cost of the pollution.
0 producers choose not to produce any pollution.
0 the value to consumers at market equilibrium exceeds the cost of production (including tax).

Internalizing a negative production externality will cause the supply curve faced by an industry to
1 shift to the left.
0 shift to the right.
0 remain unchanged.
0 shift either right or left, depending on the industry.

To enhance the well-being of society, a social planner will encourage firms to increase production when
0 there is excess supply in the market.
0 the firms are producing basic goods.
1 technology spillovers are associated with production.
0 negative externalities associated with production are imposed only upon consumers.

A positive production externality will cause a market to produce
0 a quantity that is socially desirable.
0 more than is socially desirable.
1 less than is socially desirable.
0 more than is market optimal.

Internalizing a positive production externality through a government subsidy will cause industry supply to
0 remain unchanged.
1 increase by an amount equal to the subsidy.
0 increase by an amount less than the subsidy.
0 decrease by an amount greater than the subsidy.

A positive consumption externality occurs when
0 Jack’s consumption is not beneficial to John.
0 Jack receives personal benefits from his own consumption of a certain good.
0 Jack’s benefit exceeds John’s benefit when they each consume the same good.
1 Jack receives a benefit from John’s consumption of a certain good.

A negative consumption externality will cause a private market to produce
1 more than is socially desirable.
0 less than is socially desirable.
0 less than is market optimal.
0 the socially desirable quantity.

When dealing with externalities, the market equilibrium can be moved closer to the social equilibrium by
1 taxing negative externalities and subsidizing positive externalities.
0 taxing both positive and negative externalities.
0 subsidizing both positive and negative externalities.
0 None of the above, because government has no corrective policy with regards to consumption externalities.

Firms that are involved in different types of business could be evidence of an attempt to
0 increase private profit at the expense of consumers.
1 internalize some forms of positive externalities.
0 increase the marginal external cost of production.
0 reduce the impact of government regulation on their business.

All remedies for externalities share the goal of
0 increasing the allocation of resources.
0 decreasing the allocation of resources.
0 moving the allocation of resources toward the market equilibrium.
1 moving the allocation of resources toward the social optimum.

Dick owns a dog whose barking annoys Dick’s neighbor Jane. Suppose that the benefit of owning the dog is worth $500 to Dick and that Jane bears a cost of $700 from the barking. Assuming Dick has the legal right to keep the dog, a possible private solution to this problem is that
1 Jane pays Dick $650 to get rid of the dog.
0 Dick pays Jane $650 for her inconvenience.
0 Jane pays Dick $500 to get rid of the dog.
0 There is no private solution that would improve this situation.

Which of the following is true of the Coase theorem ?
0 The bargain outcome will be inefficient.
1 Interested parties can reach an outcome in which everyone is better off.
0 Interested parties will need an arbitrator in order to reach an agreement that is efficient.
0 Government intervention is necessary to solve the problem of externalities.

Employing a lawyer to draft and enforce a private contract between parties wishing to solve an externality problem is an example of
0 a sunk cost.
0 an implicit cost.
1 a transaction cost.
0 an opportunity cost.

Pigovian taxes
0 are rarely preferred to direct regulation.
0 are frequently used to discourage imports.
0 encourage consumers to avoid sales taxes by shopping on-line.
1 give factory owners an economic incentive to reduce pollution.

A Pigovian tax
0 is a form of regulation.
1 allocates pollution to those factories that face the highest cost of reducing it.
0 works well for all types of externalities.
0 is deemed inferior to regulatory policy by most economists.

In some cases, pollution permits may be better than a Pigovian tax because
1 the government can set a maximum level of pollution using permits.
0 pollution permits allow for a market solution while a Pigovian tax does not.
0 pollution permits are never preferred over a Pigovian tax.
0 pollution permits generate more revenue for the government than a Pigovian tax.

Which of the following is NOT true concerning tradable pollution permits?
0 Tradable pollution permits are a scarce resource.
0 Tradable pollution permits can be traded in a market governed by supply and demand.
1 Tradable pollution permits eventually lead to an efficient elimination of all pollution.
0 Tradable pollution permits will be sold by firms that can reduce pollution at low costs.

Which of the following policies is government most inclined to use when faced with a positive externality?
0 permits
0 taxation
1 subsidies
0 usage fees

Externalities occur when
1 one person’s actions affect the well-being of a bystander.
0 the government imposes taxes.
0 increases in the price of oil cause gasoline prices to rise.
0 higher wages result in increased spending.

Private markets fail to account for externalities because
0 externalities don’t occur in private markets.
0 sellers include any costs associated with externalities in the price of their product.
1 decision makers in the market fail to take into account the external effects of their behavior.
0 the government can easily correct any adverse effect externalities may have on the market.

A beekeeper places his hives of bees in an orchard so that the bees can gather nectar to produce honey. As a result, the bees pollinate the orchard which increases the yield of fruit and also causes
0 a positive externality that benefits only the beekeeper.
0 a negative externality since the bees are a hazard to the orchard owner.
0 a positive externality that benefits only the owner of the orchard.
1 positive externalities that benefit both the beekeeper and the orchard owner.

When negative production externalities are present in a market
0 private costs will be greater than social costs.
1 social costs will be greater than private costs.
0 government regulation to resolve the problem is necessary.
0 the market will not be able to reach any equilibrium situation.

A fertilizer plant emits a very foul odor (a negative externality) during the production process. If the government forces the plant to internalize the externality, then the
0 supply curve for fertilizer would shift to the right (down).
1 supply curve for fertilizer would shift to the left (up).
0 demand curve for fertilizer would shift to the right (up).
0 demand curve for fertilizer would shift to the left (down).

When a market experiences a positive consumption externality,
1 the demand curve does not reflect the value to society of the good.
0 too much of the good is being produced.
0 the government can internalize the externality by imposing a tax on the product.
0 the private value is greater than the social value.




Internalizing an externality refers to
0 the fact that sellers only consider their private costs when making a decision.
0 the fact that buyers only consider their private benefits when making a decision.	
1 altering incentives so people consider the external effects of their actions when making a decision.
0 government establishing agencies such as the Environmental Protection Agency to enforce regulations.

The government can internalize a positive production externality by
0 taxing production which would decrease supply.
0 taxing production which would increase supply.
0 subsidizing production which would decrease supply.
1 subsidizing production which would increase supply.

Technology spillover means that
0 it is the government’s responsibility to subsidize firms which are engaged in high-tech research.
1 a firm’s research yields technological knowledge that can then be used by society as a whole.
0 those firms engaged in technology research may be taxed by the government if that research causes negative externalities in the market.
0 when firms invest in the latest production technology, the cost of that technology ‘spills over’ to the prices consumers must pay for the product.

When a market experiences a positive production externality, we can expect a
1 smaller market output and a higher market price than optimal.
0 greater market output and lower market price than optimal.
0 greater market output and higher market price than optimal.
0 smaller market output and lower market price than optimal.

If the government wanted to ensure the market reaches the social optimum in the presence of a technology spillover, it should
0 impose a Pigovian tax on any firm producing a technology spillover.	
0 offer tax credits to consumers that are adversely affected by the new technology.
1 subsidize producers by an amount equal to the value of the technology spillover.
0 provide research grants to those firms not currently engaging in research to increase competition in the industry.

When production externalities exist, policymakers can sometimes improve market outcomes by
0 taxing both positive and negative externalities.
0 subsidizing both positive and negative externalities.
1 taxing negative externalities and subsidizing positive externalities.
0 taxing positive externalities and subsidizing negative externalities.

When action is taken to remedy externalities, the goal is to
0 increase total production in the economy.
1 move the allocation of resources closer to the social optimum.
0 eliminate the externalities without affecting market outcomes.
0 hold the government accountable for eliminating these market failures.

The Coase theorem suggests that private markets may not be able to solve the problem of externalities
1 when the number of interested parties is large and costs are high.
0 if government does not become actively involved in the process.
0 if the firm in the market is a monopoly.
0 when market participants do not want the externality to be eliminated.

Roger enjoys an oak tree in his yard, but its leaves blow onto his neighbor Nancy’s yard each fall which she must clean up. If the benefit of the tree is worth $400 to Roger and the cost to Nancy of the tree is $600, which of the following statements would be true?
0 Nancy can pay Roger $200 to get rid of the tree.
0 Roger can pay Nancy $500 for her inconvenience.
1 Nancy can pay Roger $500 to get rid of the tree.
0 There is no private solution that would improve this situation.

Private solutions may not always be possible if negotiating and enforcing these solutions involve high
0 Pigovian taxes.
0 opportunity costs.
0 deadweight losses.
1 transaction costs.

If only a few people are affected by an externality, then it is likely that
0 Pigovian taxes will provide the most efficient solution to the externality.
0 command-and-control regulation will provide the most efficient solution to the externality.
1 a private solution to the inefficiency will occur.
0 a private solution will be very difficult to negotiate.

Emission controls on automobiles is an example of a
0 Pigovian tax on automobiles, based on how much they pollute.
1 command-and-control policy to increase social efficiency.
0 policy that reduces pollution by allocating resources through market mechanisms.
0 policy to reduce congestion on urban freeways.

A Pigovian tax is a tax
0 that will move the market away from the optimum quantity.
0 on pollution regulations.
1 that is enacted to correct the effects of a negative externality.
0 that special interest groups lobby for in order to decrease the cost of producing goods and services.

A comparison between a Pigovian tax and tradable pollution permits shows that
0 both policies will effectively eliminate a positive externality in a market.
1 a Pigovian tax sets the price of pollution where pollution permits set the quantity of pollution.
0 levying a Pigovian tax is always preferable to issuing pollution permits.
0 a Pigovian tax fixes the acceptable pollution quantity where pollution permits allow for increases in pollution levels.

When one firm sells its pollution permit to another firm, each of the following will occur EXCEPT
0 both firms benefit.
0 social welfare is enhanced.
1 government revenue increases.
0 the total amount of pollution remains the same.

What should policymakers do if they wish to encourage production (such as medical research) that provides a positive externality?
0 place taxes on the sale of prescription drugs
1 provide subsidies to firms engaged in medical research
0 impose years of trials and testing on selected medical procedures
0 ensure only the most qualified researchers are employed by issuing licenses to work at these firms

A good is excludable if
0 it is not a normal good.
1 people can be prevented from using it.
0 the government regulates its availability.
0 one person’s use of the good diminishes another person’s enjoyment of it.

If one person’s use of a good diminishes another person’s enjoyment of it, the good is
1 rival.
0 normal.
0 excludable.
0 exhaustible.

Goods that are nonexcludable and nonrival are
0 common resources.
0 natural monopolies.
0 private goods.
1 public goods.

The market does not provide national defense because
0 the fixed cost of national defense is too high.
0 the resources to operate national defense are not available in the private sector.
1 it is impossible to prevent any single person from enjoying the benefit of national defense.
0 all of the above

The fish in the ocean are an example of a
0 private good.
0 public good.
1 common resource.
0 natural monopoly good.

Due to the externalities associated with public goods and common resources,
0 private markets will lead to an efficient allocation of resources.
0 private markets will correct for the gain or loss in consumer surplus.
1 government intervention can potentially raise economic well-being.
0 all of the above

Market failure associated with the free-rider problem is a result of 
0 a problem associated with pollution.
0 a project in which costs exceed benefits.
0 losses that accrue to providers of the product.
1 benefits that accrue to those who don’t pay.

Basic research is a public good because it
0 is a rival good.
1 is difficult to exclude those who might benefit from it.
0 is used to develop public goods.
0 always benefits developed countries at the expense of developing countries.

If everyone benefits from helping the poor,
1 taxing the wealthy to raise the living standards of the poor can potentially make everyone better off.
0 government intervention can only make things worse.
0 eliminating taxes aimed at redistributing income will necessarily make rich people better off.
0 private markets can adequately provide charity programs to help the poor despite free-rider problems.

A lighthouse is typically considered a good example of a public good because
0 there is rarely another lighthouse nearby to provide competition.
1 all passing ships are able to enjoy the benefits of the lighthouse without paying.
0 a nearby port authority cannot avoid paying fees to the lighthouse owner.
0 the owner of the lighthouse is able to exclude beneficiaries from enjoying the lighthouse.

Which of the following suggests that individuals do not place an infinite value on human life?
0 sky-diving
0 road intersections without stop signs
0 cars that are manufactured and purchased without the latest safety features
1 all of the above

Some goods can be either common resources or public goods depending on
0 the marginal cost of the good.
1 whether the good is rival.
0 how policymakers deal with the good.
0 none of the above.

One way to eliminate the Tragedy of the Commons is to
1 limit access to the commons.
0 increase access to the commons.
0 increase law enforcement in public areas.
0 provide more public land for recreation.

Overuse of common resources can potentially be resolved by governments that
0 subsidize use.
0 deregulate use.
1 convert the common resource to a private good.
0 all of the above

If a road is congested, then use of that road by an additional person would lead to a
0 positive externality.
1 negative externality.
0 natural monopoly problem.
0 free-rider problem with rush hour drivers stuck in traffic.

In an attempt to improve the pollution problem outside the central city of Singapore, the Singapore government
0 charges a premium tax on gasoline.
0 allows only motorcycle and bicycle transportation.
1 auctions off the right to license new cars.
0 does not allow taxis to travel outside the central city.

Excessive fishing occurs because
0 fishermen have other marketable skills and do not fear exploitation of fish reserves.
0 fishermen rely on government managers to worry about fish populations.
1 each individual fisherman has little incentive to maintain the species for the next year.
0 fishermen are concerned about the population dynamics of fish biomass, not current harvest rates.

The U.S. government protects fish by
0 subsidizing the fishing industry.
0 heavily taxing competing industries.
0 increasing taxes on fishing poles and lures.
1 selling fishing licenses and regulating fish lengths.

Why do elephants face the threat of extinction while cows do not?
0 There is a high demand for products that come only from the cow.
1 Cattle are owned by ranchers, while elephants are owned by no one.
0 There are still lots of cattle that roam free, while most elephants are in zoos.
0 Cattle are a valuable source of income for many people and elephants have no market value.

A good solution to saving the tiger from extinction would be to
0 tax the sale of tiger hides.
0 outlaw the sale of tigers or any part of them.
1 give the tigers’ habitat to someone.
0 regulate the traditional use of Asian medicines that use tiger liver.

To most economists, the best solution to the overcrowding problem at Yellowstone National park is to
0 increase financial aid from the government.
0 place daily quotas on the number of vehicles that enter the park.
1 increase entrance fees to the park.
0 temporarily close down damaged sections of the park.

When a good does not have a price attached to it, private markets
0 are characterized by market failure.
0 can sometimes be improved by the government.
0 cannot ensure that the good is produced and consumed in the proper amounts.
1 all of the above

Fire protection is a good example of a natural monopoly good because
0 it is rival.
0 it is nonexcludable.
0 it is always provided by the government.
1 protecting an extra house is unlikely to reduce the protection available to others.

According to experience, the most effective solution to highway congestion is to
0 build more roads.
0 discourage urban sprawl by subsidizing urban apartment rents.
1 set a price for access to roads, which is paid by those who use them.
0 limit access to roads during the most congested times of the day.

A common theme among examples of market failure is
0 the good being provided always harms society in some systematic way.
0 there are regulations that prohibit the efficient functioning of private markets.
1 some item of value does not have an owner with the legal authority to control it.
0 cost–benefit analysis is likely to lead to implementation policies that promote private provision of goods and services.

Two characteristics of any private good are
0 excludable and nonrival.
1 excludable and rival.
0 nonexcludable and rival.
0 nonexcludable and nonrival.

What is meant by the non-excludability characteristic of public goods?
0 The government produces a good whether or not anyone wants to purchase the good.
0 The marginal cost of producing another unit of a good is zero.
0 Only the rich can afford a good so the poor are excluded.
1 The nature of a good allows individuals who do not pay for the good to consume it.

A good that is both nonrival and excludable would be a
0 common resource good.
1 natural monopoly.
0 public good.
0 private good.

Which characteristic is associated with both public goods as well as common resources?
0 rival
0 nonrival
0 excludable
1 nonexcludable

Which of the following will NOT occur when a person uses a common resource?
0 It causes an externality.
0 Others will be worse off.
1 No one else will be able to use the common resource.
0 The person will probably not be charged for using the common resource.

Which of the following would NOT be considered a private good?
0 clothing
0 pizza
0 Palm Pilot
1 cable TV

If the provision of public goods were left to the private sector
0 the outcome would be more efficient, because the government is notoriously inefficient.
0 more of the public goods would be produced than society desires.
1 the free-rider problem would cause less than the efficient quantity to be produced.
0 the government would be forced to raise taxes.

A free rider is a
0 person who will only purchase a product on sale.
1 person who receives the benefit of a good but avoids paying for it.
0 supplier who can produce a good at no cost.
0 person who takes advantage of tax loop-holes to lower his taxes.

Public goods such as national defense are provided by the government because
0 it is impossible for private markets to produce public goods.
0 products provided by the government can be produced more efficiently.
1 free riders make it difficult for private markets to supply the socially optimal quantity.
0 if the good were produced in private markets, most likely too much of the product would be produced.

If the government decided to build a new highway, the first step would be to conduct a study to determine the value of the project. This study would be called a
0 fiscal analysis.
0 monetary analysis.
0 welfare analysis.
1 cost–benefit analysis.

It is apparent that externalities are present in a market whenever
0 a shortage exists.
0 the price is higher than equilibrium price.
1 private costs differ from social costs.
0 the seller is not making a profit.

Each of the following explain why cost–benefit analysis is such a difficult job EXCEPT
0 there is no price with which to judge the value of a public good.
0 surveys are often biased and unreliable.
0 it is difficult to identify all factors that influence the costs and benefits of public goods.
1 government projects rarely have sufficient funding to complete projects on time.

To increase safety at a bad intersection, you must decide whether to install a traffic light in your hometown at a cost of $10,000. If the traffic light reduces the risk of fatality by 0.5 percent and the value of a human life is about $10 million, you should
1 install the light because the expected benefit of $50,000 is greater than the cost.
0 install the light because the expected benefit of $20,000 is greater than the cost.
0 not install the light because the expected benefit of $10,000 is only equal to the cost.
0 not install the light because the expected benefit of $5,000 is less than the cost.

When trying to determine if Americans would be willing to spend $1 billion to successfully restore salmon in the Snake River, the Army Corps of Engineers would be determining
0 moral value.
1 existence value.
0 restoration value.
0 public value.

Suppose twenty ranchers jointly own 5000 acres. Their cows graze on the land during spring and summer. The land becomes over-grazed. This is an example of
1 the Tragedy of the Commons.
0 an assignment of pollution rights.
0 negligence.
0 a positive externality.

The Tragedy of the Commons can be corrected by
0 providing more of the resource for public use.
1 assigning property rights to individuals.
0 providing government subsidies for the resource.
0 making certain everyone in the economy has access to the resource.

If the use of a common resource is not regulated,
0 it cannot be used by anyone.
0 the economy will end up with too much of a good thing.
0 it becomes a private good.
1 it will be overused.

Knowledge is a good example of a
1 public good.
0 private good.
0 common resource.
0 natural monopoly good.

In an attempt to remedy the presence of a negative externality such as pollution in a market, the government may choose to impose a
1 Pigovian tax.
0 subsidy.
0 command-and-control policy.
0 Coase theorem solution.

If a road is congested, then use of that road by an additional person would lead to a
1 negative externality.
0 positive externality.
0 natural monopoly problem.
0 free-rider problem with rush hour drivers stuck in traffic.

The reason why elephants are endangered and cows are not is because
0 cows are not as valuable as elephants.
1 elephants are a common resource and cows are a private good.
0 cows are a common resource and elephants are a private good.
0 it is legal to kill cows, but not elephants.

It is common knowledge that many U.S. national parks have become overused. One possible solution to this problem is to
1 increase entrance fees.
0 conduct a study to determine the carrying capacity of the individual parks.
0 reduce the national park service budget.
0 All of the above are possible solutions.

National parks have become “overrun and overtrampled” primarily because
0 park administrators have not historically been the best managers of park resources.
1 national parks are treated as free goods by their visitors.
0 fees charged at national parks are used by the government to provide other public goods and not for park upkeep.
0 the entrance fee to national parks today is comparable to the fee charged at Disney World.

One problem that occurs when the government places a tax on gasoline is that it
0 does nothing to reduce traffic on the highways.
0 does not affect driving behavior at all.
0 does nothing to internalize the congestion externality problem.
1 	discourages driving on congested roads, but also on noncongested roads that have no congestion externality.

In all cases, the market fails to allocate resources efficiently because
0 the government refuses to intervene in private markets.
1 property rights are not well established.
0 individuals in private markets become too greedy.
0 only the government can allocate resources efficiently.

In designing a tax system, policymakers have two objectives:
0 equity and revenue.
0 revenue and debt reduction.
1 equity and efficiency.
0 revenue and expenditure.

The most common explanation for Social Security payments accounting for a larger share of federal government expenditures is
0 falling payroll tax receipts.
1 increases in life expectancy.
0 increases in birth rates among teenagers and the poor.
0 people becoming eligible for Social Security benefits at an earlier age.

In general, the two most important taxes for state and local governments are
1 sales taxes and property taxes.
0 sin taxes and gasoline taxes.
0 income taxes and estate taxes.
0 excise taxes and corporate taxes.

The biggest single expenditure for state and local governments is
0 Social Security.
1 education.
0 transportation.
0 unemployment compensation.

The largest source of revenue for the federal government is the
0 property tax.
0 corporate income tax.
1 individual income tax.
0 import and export tax.

As government debt increases,
0 a trade-off with government deficits is inevitable.
1 government must spend a larger share of its revenue on interest payments.
0 evidence suggests that spending on social insurance programs will be reduced.
0 all of the above

A tax on the wages that a firm pays its workers is called a(n)
1 payroll tax.
0 excise tax.
0 income tax.
0 consumption tax.

When government receipts exceed total government spending during a fiscal year the difference
0 is a budget deficit.
1 is a budget surplus.
0 is the national debt.
0 becomes federal tax refunds.

When taxes are imposed on a commodity,
0 there is never a deadweight loss.
0 these taxes are considered nondistortionary.
0 tax revenue will rise by the amount of the tax multiplied by the before-tax level of consumption.
1 some consumers alter their consumption by not purchasing the taxed commodity.

The U.S. income tax
0 encourages saving.
0 has no effect on saving.
1 discourages saving.
0 will reduce the administrative burden of taxation.

When a taxpayer attempts to legally reduce her tax liability, she is engaging in
0 tax evasion.
1 tax avoidance.
0 a tax return compensation plan.
0 activities outside the intent of tax law.

When tax laws give preferential treatment to specific types of behavior it is called
0 a political payoff.
0 tax evasion.
1 a tax loophole.
0 compensation for the benefit of society.

As tax laws become more complex,
0 compliance costs are most likely to decrease.
1 the administrative burden of taxes is increased.
0 the government always collects more in tax revenue.
0 the amount of tax revenue lost to tax evasion always decreases.

If marginal tax rates increase, the
0 average tax rate will be falling.
1 deadweight loss from taxes will rise.
0 deadweight loss from taxes is unaffected.
0 deadweight loss from taxes will be reduced.

The extra taxes paid on an additional dollar of taxable income is called the
0 average tax liability.
0 average tax rate.
0 marginal tax liability.
1 marginal tax rate.

If the government were to impose a tax that assigned everyone the same tax liability, it would be
0 an equitable tax.
1 a lump-sum tax.
0 supported by the poor.
0 all of the above.

The benefits principle of taxation can be used to argue that the wealthy should pay higher taxes than the poor on the basis that
0 the poor are more active in political processes.
0 police services are more frequently used in poor neighborhoods.
0 there is more crime in rich neighborhoods than poor neighborhoods.
1 the wealthy benefit more from services provided by government than the poor.

When the marginal tax rate exceeds the average tax rate, the tax is
1 progressive.
0 regressive.
0 proportional.
0 non-egalitarian.

The “flypaper theory” of taxation suggests that
0 taxes are never paid by the most wealthy citizens.
0 the benefits principle of taxation is not a viable option for policymakers.
1 the individual or corporation who actually pays the tax cannot share the burden of the tax.
0 the individual or corporation who actually pays the tax is able to shift the burden of the tax to others

“A $1,000 tax paid by a poor person may be a larger sacrifice than a $10,000 tax paid by a wealthy person” is an argument based on the
0 regressive tax argument.
0 horizontal equity principle.
1 ability-to-pay principle.
0 benefits principle.

Vertical equity states that taxpayers with a greater ability to pay taxes should
1 contribute a larger amount.
0 be less subject to administrative burdens of a tax.
0 be less subject to tax distortions that lead to deadweight losses.
0 contribute a decreasing proportion of each increment in income to taxes.

Which of the following is a tax system in which all taxpayers pay the same percentage of their income in taxes?
0 regressive
0 progressive
1 proportional
0 horizontal equity

When the government levies a tax on a corporation,
0 all the burden of the tax ultimately falls on owners.
0 there are very few distortions to individual incentives.
0 it is meeting all of the requirements for vertical equity.
1 the corporation is more like a tax collector than a taxpayer.

The essence of most proposals for a flat tax are captured in
1 a single, low tax rate applied to all income above a certain level.
0 an initial low flat tax rate that increases as a taxpayer’s income increases.
0 a single tax rate with many exemptions that provide incentives to people who save.
0 a lump-sum tax that all taxpayers must pay, and then a fixed low tax rate for all income above a certain level.

Incentives to work and save are reduced when
1 income taxes are higher.
0 Pigovian taxes are implemented.
0 consumption taxes replace income taxes.
0 all of the above

Which of the following statements is correct?
0 Since 1980, government revenue as a percent of GDP has declined in the United States.
0 When government revenues exceed government spending, government is said to be running a deficit.
0 National defense is the largest outlay for the federal government.
1 As a nation gets richer, its tax burden typically increases as well.

State and local governments receive the largest portion of their tax revenues from
0 social insurance taxes and excise taxes.
1 sales taxes and property taxes.
0 estate taxes and income taxes.
0 corporate income taxes and sales taxes.

A person’s tax liability refers to
0 the percentage of income that a person must pay in taxes.
1 the amount of income tax a person owes to the government.
0 the amount of tax the government is required to refund each person.
0 deductions that can be legally subtracted from a person’s income each year.

The government finances the budget deficit by
1 borrowing from the public.
0 printing currency in the amount of the budget deficit.
0 selling government services for a large profit to the public.
0 requiring that budget surpluses occur every two years to pay off the deficits.

Which component of federal government spending is the largest?
0 national defense
0 health and education
1 Social Security
0 interest on the debt

With a progressive income tax, marginal tax rates rise as income rises. This means that in general,
0 rich families will benefit at the expense of poor families.
0 every family will pay the same percentage of their income in taxes.
0 lower-income families will pay a larger percentage of their income in taxes.
1 higher-income families will pay a larger percentage of their income in taxes.

A tax levied on the total amount spent in retail stores is called a
1 sales tax.
0 excise tax.
0 corporate tax.
0 proportional tax.

The deadweight loss associated with a tax on a product occurs because
0 the revenue generated by the tax will be wasted by the government.
0 those purchasing the product will now have to pay a higher price for the product.
0 costs to firms will increase since they will be responsible for collecting the tax.
1 some consumers will choose not to consume the product that is taxed.

When the government places a tax on labor earnings, one result is that people
1 will have less incentive to work.
0 try to save more of the income they get to keep.
0 will choose to work more in an attempt to replace the loss from the tax.
0 tend to start their own business so their income will not be considered labor earnings.

Tax evasion is
0 a legal way to keep from paying taxes.
1 always illegal.
0 filing taxes after the April 15th deadline.
0 the same thing as tax avoidance.

Each of the following is a reason why tax loopholes exist EXCEPT
0 ambiguities in tax laws.
0 special treatment of specific types of behavior.
0 preferential tax treatment for some business activities.
1 the lack of consistent interpretations of the tax laws by the Supreme Court.

The marginal tax rate for a lump-sum tax
1 is always zero.
0 is usually positive.
0 is usually negative.
0 can be either positive or negative, depending on the amount of income earned.

One way to reduce the administrative burden of the tax system is to
0 require taxpayers to keep adequate financial records throughout the year.
1 simplify the tax laws.
0 hire a part-time accountant or tax attorney.
0 change the April 15th tax deadline to give taxpayers additional time to file their tax returns.

If the government taxes the first $50,000 of a person’s income at 20% and all income above $50,000 at 50%, then a person making $80,000 would be required to pay how much in taxes?
0 $10,000
0 $15,000
0 $20,000
1 $25,000

If the government were attempting to get people to save more of their income they might choose to impose a
1 consumption tax.
0 lump-sum tax.
0 progressive tax.
0 regressive tax.

A well-designed tax system addresses both
0 equity and government revenue.
1 equity and efficiency.
0 government revenue and debt reduction.
0 government revenue and expenditure.

If Shannon earns $60,000 a year and pays $12,000 in taxes while Sean earns $90,000 yearly and pays $18,000 in taxes, this income tax system would be
0 lump-sum.
1 proportional.
0 regressive.
0 progressive.

Lump-sum taxes are rarely used in the real world because they
0 have high deadweight losses.
0 have high administrative burdens.
0 are very inefficient.
1 take the same amount of money from both poor and rich.

The “marriage tax” refers to
0 the increase in income exclusion a married couple faces over two single people.
0 the tax that must be paid in most states to receive a marriage license.
1 a couple’s tax liability increasing as a result of getting married.
0 married couples with the same income always pay the same amount of income taxes.

The greater the resources devoted to complying with tax laws the
1 higher the administrative burden of a tax.
0 lower the deadweight loss of a tax.
0 lower the administrative burden of a tax.
0 more regressive the tax system becomes.

The concept that each citizen should make an ‘equal sacrifice’ and pay taxes according to how well that person can shoulder the burden is called
0 the benefits principle.
0 vertical equity.
1 the ability-to-pay principle.
0 horizontal equity.

The argument that might be used to require wealthier taxpayers to pay more in taxes for law enforcement because they own more and therefore have more to protect than poorer taxpayers would be based on
0 vertical equity.
0 horizontal equity.
0 the ability-to-pay principle.
1 the benefits principle.

Horizontal equity refers to the idea that
0 taxpayers with a greater ability to pay taxes should pay larger amounts.
1 taxpayers with similar abilities to pay taxes should pay the same amount.
0 all taxpayers should pay the same fraction of income regardless of ability.
0 taxpayers should pay taxes based on the benefits they receive from government services.

The corporate income tax
0 satisfies both equity and efficiency considerations.
0 does not distort the incentives of customers since it is imposed on corporations.
0 is the best example of why the flypaper theory of tax incidence is correct.
1 falls ultimately on the owners, workers and customers of the corporation.

Which of the following statements would NOT be used by an advocate of the flat tax?
0 The flat tax would eliminate many of the deductions allowed under the current income tax.
0 Because the flat tax is so simple, the administrative burden of the tax would be greatly reduced.
1 Flat taxes have no deadweight loss.
0 The flat tax is more like a consumption tax which would increase the incentive to save.

Total revenue necessarily equals
0 total output multiplied by the average cost of output.
1 total output multiplied by sales price of output.
0 (total output multiplied by sales price) – inventory surplus.
0 (total output multiplied by the average cost of output) – inventory shortage.

An example of an implicit cost of production would be the
0 cost of raw materials for a printing company to print books.
1 income an entrepreneur could have earned working elsewhere.
0 cost of a delivery truck in a business that rarely makes deliveries.
0 All of the above are correct.

In economics, the field of industrial organization answers which of the following questions?
0 Why are consumers subject to the law of demand?
0 Why do firms experience falling marginal product of labor?
0 Why do firms consider production costs when determining product supply?
1 How does the difference in the number of firms affect prices and efficiency of market outcomes?

According to this scenario, what is the explicit cost of purchasing the factory for the first year of operation?
1 $10,000
0 $20,000
0 $30,000
0 $40,000

According to this scenario, what is the opportunity cost of purchasing the factory for the first year of operation?
0 $10,000
0 $20,000
0 $30,000
1 $40,000

The marginal product of labor can be defined as (where . denotes “change”)
0 	profit//labor.
1 	output//labor.
0 	labor//total cost.
0 	labor//output.

Diminishing marginal product of labor would arise when
0 workers are discouraged about the lack of help from other workers.
0 only new workers are trained in using the most productive capital.
1 crowded office space reduces the productivity of new workers.
0 union workers are told to reduce their work effort in preparation for a new round of collective bargaining talks.

The slope of the total product curve reveals information about the
1 marginal product of workers.
0 average product of workers.
0 maximum product of workers.
0 total product of workers.

Which of the following costs will be zero if a firm produces zero?
0 average cost
1 variable cost
0 opportunity cost
0 All of the above are correct.

The cost to produce an additional unit of output is the firm’s
0 average variable cost.
1 marginal cost.
0 average opportunity cost.
0 total productivity cost.

Average total cost equals
1 (fixed costs + variable costs)/quantity produced.
0 (fixed costs + variable costs)/change in quantity produced.
0 change in total costs/quantity produced.
0 change in total costs/change in quantity produced.

If we assume that marginal product of labor is always decreasing, average total cost
0 and average fixed cost are always falling.
0 and average fixed cost are always U-shaped.
0 and average fixed cost are always rising.
1 is U-shaped and average fixed cost is always falling.

If marginal cost is rising
0 average total cost must be falling.
0 average fixed cost must be rising.
0 marginal product must be rising.
1 marginal product must be falling.

Average total cost is very high when a small amount of output is produced because
1 average fixed cost is large.
0 of diminishing marginal product.
0 variable costs are spread over only a few units of output.
0 All of the above are correct.

At all levels of production beyond the point where the marginal cost curve crosses the average variable cost curve, average variable cost
0 falls.
1 rises.
0 does not change.
0 All of the above are possible, it depends on the shape of the marginal cost curve.

When a factory is operating in the short run,
0 it cannot alter variable costs.
0 total cost and variable cost are usually the same.
0 average fixed cost rises as output increases.
1 it cannot adjust the quantity of some inputs.

Economies of scale arise when
0 an economy is self-sufficient in production.
0 individuals in a society are self-sufficient.
1 workers are able to specialize in a particular task.
0 fixed costs are large relative to variable costs.

Susan’s firm produces 2,000 beach towels and sells them for $10 each. Her total cost of producing these towels is $10,000. Her total profits
0 are $30,000.
0 are $20,000.
1 are $10,000.
0 cannot be computed from the information provided.

Alan produces modems. Included in his cost are (i) what it costs him to purchase parts and (ii) the salary he could have earned if he had worked for Microsoft instead.
0 both (i) and (ii) are explicit costs
0 both (i) and (ii) are implicit costs
1 (i) is an explicit cost, (ii) is an implicit cost
0 (i) is an implicit cost, (ii) is an explicit cost

Alberto produces futons in a warehouse he paid for with $500,000 of winnings from a game show. He could instead have saved the money and earned interest on it. Economists would
0 consider this interest a cost and accountants would report it as a cost.
1 consider this interest a cost, but accountants would not report it as a cost.
0 not consider this interest a cost, but accountants would report it as a cost.
0 not consider this interest a cost and accountants would not report it as a cost.

Accounting profits equal total revenues minus
0 explicit costs. Economic profits equal total revenues minus implicit costs.
0 implicit costs. Economic profits equal total revenues minus explicit costs.
0 explicit and implicit costs. Economic profits equal total revenues minus implicit costs.
1 None of the above is correct.

A firm’s economic profit is equal to revenue less
0 explicit costs.
0 implicit costs.
0 money costs.
1 total opportunity costs.

Which of the following is most directly a statement about the production function?
0 Alberto sells 1,000 futons for $700 each.
0 The opportunity costs for Susan to produce 10,000 beach towels is $15,000.
1 If he works for forty hours, Alan can make about 100 modems.
0 Bartholomew finds he maximizes profits by producing 10,000 hats.

Marginal product will be positive and diminishing if the production function slopes
0 downward and becomes flatter as more workers are hired.
0 downward and becomes steeper as more workers are hired.
1 upward and becomes flatter as more workers are hired.
0 upward and becomes steeper as more workers are hired.

Diminishing marginal product occurs
1 as additional workers have to share existing equipment and space.
0 as additional workers expect greater hourly wages than previous workers.
0 both a and b are correct
0 neither a nor b is correct

If a firm faces diminishing marginal product, then to produce an additional unit of output requires adding
1 more workers than were added to produce the previous unit, so total cost rises more than it rose to produce the previous unit.
0 more workers than were added to produce the previous unit, so total cost rises less than it rose to produce the previous unit.
0 fewer workers than were added to produce the previous unit, so total cost rises more than it rose to produce the previous unit.
0 fewer workers than were added to produce the previous unit, so total cost rises less than it rose to produce the previous unit.

Which of the following is correct if there is diminishing marginal product of labor? (i). As the number of workers hired increases, the production function gets steeper. (ii). As the quantity of output produced increases, the total cost curve gets flatter.
0 both (i) and (ii) are correct
1 neither (i) nor (ii) is correct
0 (i) is correct, but (ii) is incorrect
0 (ii) is correct, but (i) is incorrect

As the quantity of output increases, the total cost curve becomes
1 steeper because of diminishing marginal product.
0 steeper because of diminishing total product.
0 flatter because of diminishing marginal product.
0 flatter because of diminishing total product.

Which of the following is a fixed cost for the Peapod Vegetarian Restaurant?
0 the cost of fresh produce
0 the wages of servers
1 the rent paid on the lease
0 the cost of napkins

It costs a firm $4,400 to produce 23 units and $4,800 to produce 24 units If they are currently producing 24 units, their average total cost
0 and marginal cost are $200.
1 is $200 and their marginal cost is $400.
0 is $400 and their marginal cost is $200.
0 and their marginal cost is $400.

Sandy produces umbrellas. Her current production is 300 a month. Her average fixed cost is $2. Her average variable cost is $5. It follows that her total cost is
0 $600.
0 $900.
0 $1,500.
1 $2,100.


For levels of output above the efficient scale, as output increases average total cost
0 and average fixed cost both increase.
0 and average fixed cost both decrease.
1 increases and average fixed cost decreases.
0 decrease and average fixed cost increases.

A logging company produces timber at a point where marginal cost is $30 and average total cost is $45. It follows that
1 average cost is falling.
0 average cost is rising.
0 marginal cost is falling.
0 marginal cost is rising.

Which of the following cost curves would not typically fall and then rise as output increases?
1 AFC
0 ATC
0 AVC
0 MC

Which of the following curves will always be below the ATC curve?
0 the AFC and MC curves
1 the AFC and AVC curves
0 the AVC and MC curves
0 the AFC, AVC, and MC curves

Which of the total cost curves is consistent with marginal cost curves and average total cost curves that are both U-shaped?
0 both (i.) and (ii.)
1 only (i.)
0 only (ii.)
0 neither (i.) nor (ii.)

	Which of the following is true concerning the long-run average-total-cost curve?
0 it is likely to be U-shaped.
0 it is flatter than the short-run average-total-cost curves.
0 all the short-run average-total-cost curves lie on the long-run average-total-cost curve.
1 All of the above are true.

When a firm’s long-run average cost curve exhibits economies of scale the long-run average cost
0 curve is horizontal.
1 curve is downward sloping.
0 curve is upward sloping.
0 equals the short-run average cost for all levels of output.

	Statistical studies show that as the output of banking firms expand, average total costs fall until banks reach a certain size at which point average total costs remain the same. According to this evidence, for lower levels of output banks have
0 constant returns to scale, while at larger levels of output they have economies of scale.
0 constant returns to scale, while at larger levels of output they have diseconomies of scale.
1 economies of scale, while at larger levels of output they have constant returns to scale.
0 diseconomies of scale, while at larger levels they have economies of scale.

	Economies of scale
0 and diseconomies of scale arise because of coordination problems.
0 and diseconomies of scale arise because of specialization.
0 arise because of coordination problems, diseconomies of scale arise from specialization.
1 arise because of specialization, diseconomies of scale arise from specialization.

In a competitive market, the actions of any single buyer or seller will
1 have a negligible impact on the market price.
0 adversely affect the profitability of more than one firm in the market.
0 cause a noticeable change in market production and price.
0 have little effect on market production, but ultimately change price.


If marginal cost is less than marginal revenue
0 the firm must be experiencing losses.
0 the firm must be earning a profit.
0 the firm must be maximizing profits.
1 a profit-maximizing firm should increase the level of production.

Which of the following is a characteristic of a perfectly competitive market?
0 Firms are price setters.
0 There are few sellers in the market.
1 Firms can exit and enter the market freely.
0 All of the above are correct.



If a perfectly competitive firm currently produces where price is greater than marginal cost it
1 will increase its profits by producing more.
0 will increase its profits by producing less.
0 is making positive economic profits.
0 is making negative economic profits.

When a perfectly competitive firm makes a decision to shut down, it is most likely that
1 price is below the minimum of average variable cost.
0 fixed costs exceed variable costs.
0 average fixed costs are rising.
0 marginal cost is above average variable cost.

A profit-maximizing firm making losses (negative profit), but still producing output faces which of the following conditions?
0 P > ATC
1 P > AVC
0 Both of the above are correct.
0 Neither of the above is correct.

The profits of a profit-maximizing firm equal
0 P 	 Q.
1 (P – ATC) 	 Q.
0 (ATC – P) c Q.
0 (MC – AVC) 	 Q.

When a profit-maximizing firm’s fixed costs are considered sunk in the short run it
0 will never show losses.
0 can set price above marginal cost.
0 maximizes profit by choosing an output level where price exceeds marginal cost.
1 can safely ignore fixed costs when deciding how much to produce.

In the long run, a profit-maximizing firm will choose to exit a market when
0 fixed costs exceed sunk costs.
0 average fixed cost is rising.
1 revenue from production is less than total costs.
0 marginal cost exceeds marginal revenue at the current level of production.

When firms have an incentive to exit a competitive market, their exit will
0 drive down market prices.
0 drive down profits of existing firms in the market.
1 decrease the quantity of goods supplied in the market.
0 All of the above are correct.

In a perfectly competitive market, the process of entry or exit ends when
0 firms are operating with excess capacity.
1 firms are making zero economic profit.
0 firms experience decreasing marginal revenue.
0 price is equal to marginal cost.

If all incumbent firms and all potential firms have the same cost curves and the market is characterized by free entry and exit, the long-run market supply curve
0 is equal to the sum of marginal cost curves.
0 slopes downward.
0 slopes upward.
1 is horizontal.

The exit of existing firms from a competitive market will
1 decrease market supply and increase market prices.
0 decrease market supply and decrease market prices.
0 increase market supply and increase market prices.
0 increase market supply and decrease market prices.

When firms in an industry have the same cost structure which is not changed by the entry or exit of firms,
0 the long-run market supply curve must be upward sloping.
1 the long-run market supply curve must be horizontal.
0 the long-run market supply curve must be downward sloping.
0 We can’t tell anything about the shape of the long-run market supply curve.

When a competitive market experiences an increase in demand that induces an increase in producer costs, which of the following is most likely to arise?
1 The long-run market supply curve will be upward sloping.
0 The condition of free entry into the market will be violated.
0 Producer profits must fall in the long run.
0 All of the above are likely to occur.

In economics, market power refers to the
1 ability of a firm to influence the market price of the good it sells.
0 ability of the market system to efficiently allocate scare goods.
0 quality of a firm’s marketing efforts.
0 forces that operate the “invisible hand.”

In a competitive market individual firms take as given
0 the level of output they produce.
1 the price they receive for their output.
0 both the level of output they produce and the price they receive.
0 neither the level of output they produce nor the price they receive.

The Not Quite Broke Ranch sells 1,000 units of beef in a competitive market and has total revenues of $200,000. From this information alone we know which of the following is $200?
0 average revenue
0 marginal revenue
0 price
1 All of the above are correct.

Other things the same, if a competitive firm doubles its output
0 average revenues fall.
0 price falls.
1 total revenues rise.
0 All of the above are correct.

If a competitive firm finds that at the current price and level of output, its marginal revenue is less than its marginal cost, it should
0 increase the price of its output.
0 decrease the price of its output.
0 increase its output.
1 decrease its output.

Competitive firms maximize profits by producing the quantity where
0 average revenue = average total cost.
0 price = average total cost.
0 marginal product = marginal cost.
1 marginal revenue = marginal cost.

At Paula’s Pizza, the marginal revenue of the last pizza produced is $12. The marginal cost of the last pizza produced is $10. In order to increase profits, Paula should:
1 increase output.
0 decrease output.
0 not change output.
0 offer a different variety of pizza.


If the price of a competitive firm’s output increased, marginal revenue
1 and the profit-maximizing level of output would both increase.
0 and the profit-maximizing level of output would both decrease.
0 would increase and the profit-maximizing level of output would decrease.
0 would decrease and the profit-maximizing level of output would increase.

In a competitive market the individual supply curve of a competitive firm is based on its
0 average revenue curve.
0 average total cost curve.
0 marginal revenue curve.
1 marginal cost curve.

In the short run a firm in a competitive market should
0 never shut down.
0 shut down only if price is less than average fixed cost.
0 shut down only if price is less than average total cost.
1 shut down only if price is less than average variable cost.

In the short run a firm should
0 never shut down.
0 shut down only if total revenues are less than total cost.
1 shut down only if total revenues are less than variable cost.
0 shut down only if total revenues are less than fixed cost.


The short-run supply curve of an individual competitive firm is its marginal cost curve above the
0 AFC curve.
0 ATC curve.
1 AVC curve.
0 point where the MC curve is downward sloping.

Some restaurants are open for breakfast, lunch, and dinner. In which of the following cases would it necessarily make sense for a restaurant to shut down for a meal?
0 Total revenues are less than total costs, but greater than variable costs.
1 Total revenues are less than variable costs.
0 Total revenues are less than sunk costs.
0 All of the above are correct.

A firm’s shut down decision
0 and its exit decision are based on comparing total revenues to total cost.
0 and its exit decision are based on comparing total revenues to variable cost.
1 is based on comparing total revenues to variable cost. While its exit decision is based on comparing total revenues to total costs.
0 None of the above is correct.

The short-run supply curve of a competitive firm is its
0 average variable cost curve below the marginal cost curve. Its long-run supply curve is its average total cost curve below the marginal cost curve.
0 average total cost curve below the marginal cost curve. Its long-run supply curve is its average variable cost curve below the marginal cost curve.
0 marginal cost curve above the average total cost curve. Its long-run supply curve is its marginal cost curve above the average variable cost curve.
1 marginal cost curve above the average variable cost curve. Its long-run supply curve is its marginal cost curve above the average total cost curve.

Crude oil is used to produce fiberglass boats. Supposing these boats are produced in a competitive market, an increase in the price of crude oil shifts
0 both the marginal cost curves of individual firms and the market supply curve right.
1 both the marginal cost curves of individual firms and the market supply curve left.
0 the marginal cost curves of individual firms right, and the market supply curve left.
0 the marginal cost curves of individual firms left, and the market supply curve right.

A competitive profit-maximizing firm makes zero economic profits. Which of the following is true?
0 Average total cost equals price.
0 Marginal cost equals price.
0 Average total cost equals average revenue.
1 All of the above are correct.

In long-run equilibrium, a perfectly competitive firm produces the level of output at which
0 total revenue is at a maximum.
1 average total cost is at a minimum.
0 marginal cost is at a minimum.
0 None of the above is correct.

If firms in a competitive market are earning economic profits greater than zero, then firms
1 enter the market, market supply shifts right and price falls.
0 exit the market, market supply shifts left and price rises.
0 enter the market, market supply shifts right and price rises.
0 None of the above is correct.

This graph of a typical firm in a competitive industry indicates that firms will
0 exit this market, so the market supply curve will shift right.
0 exit this market, so the market supply curve will shift left.
1 enter this market, so the market supply curve will shift right.
0 enter this market, so the market supply curve will shift left.

In the long run in a perfectly competitive industry, economic profits of all firms will equal zero in the long run
0 under no circumstances.
1 only if the long-run market supply curve is horizontal.
0 only if the long-run market supply curve is upward sloping.
0 whether the long-run market supply curve is horizontal or upward sloping.

Which of the following is correct?
0 A decrease in the market demand of some good in a competitive market is likely to increase the profits of firms.
1 If firms have different costs, in the long run price reflects the costs of the highest cost firm.
0 If price falls in a competitive market, the lowest cost firms will be the first to exit.
0 All of the above are correct.

In the paper industry, as more paper makers enter the market, the price of raw materials such as pulp will be bid up. If the paper industry operates in a perfectly competitive market, then an increase in demand causes the price of paper to rise in the
0 short run only.
0 long run only.
1 short run and the long run.
0 short run, but to fall in the long run.

The long-run supply curve in a perfectly competitive market is more elastic than in the short run because
1 firms can enter or exit the market.
0 some firms have higher costs than others.
0 some resources are available only in limited quantities.
0 All of the above are correct.

Which of the following statements about a firm’s market pricing of its product is true?
0 Both competitive firms and monopolies are price makers.
0 Both competitive firms and monopolies are price takers.
1 A competitive firm is a price taker and a monopoly is a price maker.
0 A competitive firm is a price maker and a monopoly is a price taker.

A monopoly’s marginal cost will most likely
0 exceed its marginal revenue.
0 be less than average fixed cost.
1 be less than the market price of its goods.
0 equal average total cost.

A fundamental source of monopoly market power arises from
0 availability of “free” natural resources, such as water or air.
0 perfectly elastic demand.
0 perfectly inelastic demand.
1 barriers to entry.

The defining characteristic of a natural monopoly is
1 economies of scale over the relevant range of output.
0 diseconomies of scale over the relevant range of output.
0 marginal cost is U-shaped over the relevant range of output.
0 marginal cost is constant over the relevant range of output.

Authors are allowed to be monopolists in the sale of their books in order to
0 satisfy literary advocacy groups that exercise their lobbying power.
1 encourage authors to write more and better books.
0 correct for the negative externalities that the internet and television impose.
0 promote a society that thinks for themselves and learns from whichever books they please.

If a monopolist faces a downward-sloping market demand curve, its
1 marginal revenue is always less than the price of the units it sells.
0 marginal revenue is greater than the price of the units it sells.
0 average revenue is always less than marginal revenue.
0 average revenue is less than the price of its product.

The monopolist’s profit-maximizing quantity of output is where
0 average cost equals marginal revenue.
1 marginal cost equals marginal revenue.
0 price equals marginal revenue.
0 All of the above are correct.

A monopolist is a price
0 taker, and therefore has no demand curve.
0 taker, and therefore has no supply curve.
0 setter, and therefore has no demand curve.
1 setter, and therefore has no supply curve.

For a monopoly firm, which of the following equalities is true?
1 price = average revenue
0 price = marginal cost
0 price = marginal revenue
0 All of the above are correct.

For a monopoly market, total surplus can be defined as the value of the good to the
0 producers minus the cost incurred by consumers.
0 producers plus the cost incurred by consumers.
1 consumers minus the cost of making the good.
0 consumers plus the cost of making the good.

The inefficiency of monopolies is created by a deadweight loss due to the fact that
0 consumers who still buy the product at the high price are worse-off.
1 consumers buy fewer units at the price the monopoly sets.
0 high monopoly prices take money from consumers’ pockets and put it in the pocket of the monopoly owners.
0 All of the above are correct.

Suppose that a firm has a monopoly on the production of a prescription drug, regulating them on the basis of cost has problems because
1 it does not provide an incentive for the monopolist to reduce its cost.
0 a monopolist is still able to generate excessive economic profits.
0 a monopolist’s costs, by definition, are higher than costs of perfectly competitive firms.
0 All of the above are correct.

The legislation passed by Congress in 1890 to reduce the market power of large and powerful “trusts” is called the
0 Clayton Act.
0 14th Amendment.
1 Sherman Act.
0 None of the above is correct.

If regulators require a monopoly to set price equal to average total cost
0 consumer surplus is maximized.
0 total social welfare is maximized.
0 Both a and b are correct.
1 Neither a nor b is correct.

Since natural monopolies have a declining average cost curve, regulating natural monopolies by setting price equal to marginal cost would
0 maximize consumer surplus.
1 cause the monopolist to operate at a loss.
0 maximize producer surplus.
0 None of the above is correct.

A perfectly price-discriminating monopolist is able to
0 produce a level of output consistent with optimal social well-being, but not maximize profit.
0 exercise illegal preferences over the gender of its employees.
1 maximize profit and produce a level of output more consistent with optimal social well-being.
0 do none of the above.

When a monopolist can price discriminate perfectly then
0 the price effect dominates the output effect on monopoly revenue, so profits fall.
1 consumer surplus and deadweight losses are transformed into monopoly profits.
0 consumer surplus is increased.
0 deadweight loss is increased.

In theory, perfect price discrimination increases
1 the monopolist’s profits.
0 consumer surplus.
0 deadweight loss.
0 All of the above are correct.

Firms may be prevented from price discrimination, if
0 there are large fluctuations in the price of raw materials.
1 buyers can arbitrage.
0 firms have high fixed costs.
0 All of the above are correct.

OPEC often holds oil production below capacity in an effort to
0 compel consumers to search for oil substitutes.
0 compel consumers to conserve oil.
1 keep prices above the competitive level.
0 create a shift in the demand for oil.

In which of the following industries do firms set prices?
0 competitive markets, but not monopoly markets
1 monopoly markets, but not competitive markets
0 competitive and monopoly markets
0 neither competitive nor monopoly markets

When a firm has a natural monopoly, other firms do not enter the market because
0 by definition natural monopolies are protected by the government.
0 the owners of natural monopolies have exclusive rights to key resources.
1 new firms cannot achieve the same low costs as the current monopolist.
0 None of the above is correct.

De Beers Diamonds is a
0 natural monopoly.
0 monopoly by virtue of a government decree.
1 monopoly because of ownership of key resources.
0 All of the above explain why De Beers Diamonds has a monopoly.

Which of the following is a barrier to entry?
0 a downward-sloping demand curve
1 a single producer is more efficient than a large number of producers
0 no close substitute for a product
0 a homogeneous product

Suppose a hospital in a small isolated town has a natural monopoly. With the idea of increasing competition, the city opens a second hospital.
1 Both hospitals will have higher average total cost than the first hospital did when it operated alone.
0 Both hospitals will have lower average total cost than the first hospital did when it operated alone.
0 Both hospitals will have the same average total cost as the first hospital when it operated alone.
0 The new hospital will have higher average total cost than the first hospital did when it operated alone, but the average total cost for the second hospital will be less.

The demand curve for an individual firm’s output is
0 downward sloping for both a competitive firm and a monopoly.
0 horizontal for both a competitive firm and a monopoly.
0 downward sloping for a competitive firm and horizontal for a monopoly.
1 horizontal for a competitive firm and downward sloping for a monopoly.

The marginal revenue of a monopoly is
0 greater than price.
0 greater than price for low levels of output, but less than price at higher levels of output.
0 equal to price.
1 less than price.

The average revenue of a monopoly is
0 greater than price.
0 greater than price for low levels of output, but less than price at higher levels of output.
1 equal to price.
0 less than price.

To maximize profits, a monopolist produces the quantity where
0 average revenue equals average cost and then sets price equal to marginal revenue.
0 average revenue equals average cost and then sets price so that all output is demanded.
0 marginal revenue equals marginal cost and then sets price to marginal revenue.
1 marginal revenue equals marginal cost and then sets price so that all output is demanded.

Which of the following is not true for a profit-maximizing monopoly?
1 price is greater than average revenue.
0 profits equal total revenue minus total cost.
0 marginal revenue equals marginal cost.
0 price is greater than marginal revenue.



The price and output of this profit-maximizing monopoly will be:
0 $100 and 6, respectively.
1 $ 70 and 3, respectively.
0 $ 50 and 4, respectively.
0 $ 40 and 5, respectively.

If a benevolent social planner ran a monopoly, price
0 and output would be higher.
0 and output would be lower.
1 would be lower and output would be higher.
0 None of the above is correct.

At the point where the monopolist produces, the value of the good to the marginal buyer is
0 greater than price.
0 less than price.
1 greater than the marginal cost to the monopolist.
0 less than the marginal cost to the monopolist.

In the diagram the deadweight loss is
0 $2.50.
0 $5.00.
1 $7.50.
0 All of the above are correct.

Which of the following concerning the social cost of monopoly is correct?
0 The profit a monopolist makes contributes to the deadweight loss created by monopoly.
1 Expenditures of a monopolist to maintain the monopoly are part of the social cost.
0 The source of the social cost is that a monopolist sets a price below marginal cost.
0 All of the above are correct.

Which of the following do antitrust laws allow for?
0 private lawsuits against firms employing certain anti-competitive tactics
0 the government to split up firms to promote competition
0 the  option for government to prevent mergers
1 All of the above are correct.

If the government sets a natural monopoly’s price equal to marginal cost
0 social welfare is maximized.
0 price falls and quantity produced rises, but social welfare is not maximized.
0 the monopolist makes an even larger profit than before.
1 the monopolist will exit the industry unless it receives a subsidy.

The incentive to reduce costs is eliminated or reduced if the government
0 operates a monopoly.
0 requires a monopoly to set average total cost equal to price.
1 Both a and b are correct.
0 Neither a nor b is correct.

Mergers
1 may be advantageous if they allow for synergies.
0 may be advantageous because competitive firms have little incentive to reduce costs as their economic profits are zero.
0 Both of the above are correct.
0 None of the above is correct.

Price discrimination is the practice of:
0 charging lower prices in the short run than in the long run.
0 charging lower prices in the long run than in the short run.
1 selling the same good at different prices to different customers.
0 selling more output in one market than in another market.

Which of the following is correct?
0 Monopolists have lower profits when price discrimination occurs.
1 Price discrimination requires being able to separate customers according to their willingness to pay.
0 Price discrimination always lowers economic welfare.
0 None of the above is correct.

Perfect price discrimination implies deadweight loss
1 and consumer surplus are both zero.
0 is zero and consumer surplus is higher than in the absence of price discrimination.
0 is greater than zero, but consumer surplus is less than in the absence of price discrimination.
0 is greater than zero, and consumer surplus is higher than in the absence of price discrimination.

Which of the following is inconsistent with price discrimination?
0 Colleges and universities provide financial aid to needy students.
1 Price per-unit increases with the quantity a person purchases.
0 Charging customers willing to clip coupons a lower price.
0 Movie tickets are priced lower for children than for adults.

Markets with only a few sellers, each offering a product similar or identical to the others, are typically referred to as
0 monopoly markets.
0 perfectly competitive markets.
0 monopolistically competitive markets.
1 oligopoly markets.

Firms in industries that have competitors but, at the same time, do not face so much competition that they are price takers, are operating in either a(n)
0 monopoly or monopolistically competitive market.
0 monopolistically competitive or perfectly competitive market.
0 oligopoly or monopoly market.
1 oligopoly or monopolistically competitive market.

Firms in the United States are typically classified as
0 duopolists.
1 imperfectly competitive.
0 oligopolists.
0 perfectly competitive.

Which list contains all market structures having many firms?
0 oligopoly and perfect competition
0 oligopoly and monopolistic competition
1 perfect competition and monopolistic competition.
0 oligopoly, perfect competition, and monopolistic competition.

As a group, oligopolists are always better-off collectively if they
0 decrease prices.
1 limit production.
0 increase production.
0 each operate according to their own self-interest.

Because each oligopolist cares about its own profit rather than the collective profit of their industry
0 society is worse-off.
1 they are unable to maintain monopoly power.
0 they are able to maximize industry profits.
0 All of the above are correct.

According to this table, assume that there are two profit-maximizing digital cable TV companies operating in this market. Further assume that they are able to “collude” on price and quantity of premium digital channel subscriptions to sell. As part of their collusive agreement they decide to take an equal share of the market. How much profit will each company make?
0 $160,000
1 $140,000
0 $120,000
0 $100,000

According to this table, what will be the quantity produced if the market is a monopoly? What will be the quantity produced if the market is a two-firm oligopoly where the two firms are unable to collude and reach a Nash equilibrium?
0 monopoly production 4,000, oligopoly production 8,000
1 monopoly production 6,000, oligopoly production 8,000
0 monopoly production 8,000, oligopoly production 10,000
0 None of the above is correct

When an oligopoly market is in Nash equilibrium,
1 a firm’s best pricing strategy depends on the strategy of other firms.
0 market price will be different for each firm.
0 individual firms will not behave as profit maximizers.
0 All of the above are correct.

Cartels are often short-lived because
0 laws often prohibit explicit collusive agreements among competitors.
0 self-interest often conflicts with cooperation.
0 it is difficult to enforce agreements reached by cartels.
1 All of the above are correct.

As the number of firms in an oligopoly grows larger, price and output in that market approach
1 those in a competitive market.
0 those in a monopoly.
0 the Nash equilibrium of a duopoly.
0 None of the above is correct.

According to this decision box, if both firms follow a dominant strategy, the losses of Firm A and Firm B respectively will be
1 –$30 b and –$25 b.
0 –$60 b and –$15 b.
0 –$15 b and–$60 b.
0 –$20 b and –$20 b.

According to this decision box, which of the following is the dominant strategies for the firms?
0 Firm A should reveal the site and Firm B should keep it secret.
0 Firm A should keep the site secret and Firm B should reveal it.
1 Both firms should reveal the site.
0 Both firms should keep the site secret.

In a world with only two countries, the noncooperative outcome to an “arms race” game is clearly
1 bad for society.
0 the best possible outcome for society.
0 optimal for one player at the expense of the other.
0 better than the cooperative outcome.

Very often, the reason that players can solve the prisoners’ dilemma game and reach the most profitable outcome is that
0 the game becomes more competitive.
1 they play the game not once, but many times.
0 each player tries to capture a large portion of the market share.
0 All of the above can solve the prisoners’ dilemma.

In a two-person repeated game, a tit-for-tat strategy starts with
1 cooperation and then each player mimics the other player’s last move.
0 cooperation and then each player is unresponsive to the strategic moves of the other player.
0 non-cooperation and then each player pursues his or her own self-interest.
0 non-cooperation and then each player cooperates when the other player demonstrates a desire for the cooperative solution.

Two students are suspected of cheating together on an exam. If both confess they each get an F on the exam. If one confesses she gets an F in the course and the other student is expelled. If neither student confesses there is no penalty. Considering only these consequences a student should
0 confess if he is certain the other will not confess.
0 never confess.
0 always confess.
1 confess if he is certain the other will confess.

The Sherman Antitrust Act
0 was passed to encourage judicial leniency in the review of cooperative agreements.
0 was concerned with Nash equilibria dominated by self-interest in prisoners’ dilemma games.
0 provided tax advantages to firms who engaged in competitive behavior.
1 restricted the ability of competitors to engage in cooperative agreements.

Antitrust laws in general are used to
1 prevent oligopolists from acting in ways that make markets less competitive.
0 help oligopolists resolve their version of the prisoner’s dilemma.
0 encourage oligopolists to pursue cooperative-interest at the expense of self-interest.
0 All of the above are correct.

Suppose discount electronics retailers free ride on information about products provided by nondiscount retailers. The information that is provided about products is
0 greater than the optimal quantity.
0 the optimal quantity.
1 less than the optimal quantity.
0 Not necessarily any one of the above.

The practice of requiring someone to buy two or more items together is
0 illegal because it allows firms to form collusive arrangements.
0 not illegal because it increases the well-being of society.
1 illegal because it allows firms to expand their market power.
0 not illegal because collusive agreements are conducive to cooperative outcomes.

The practice of selling a product to retailers and requiring the retailers to charge a specific price for the product is called
1 resale price maintenance.
0 fixed retail pricing.
0 unfair trade.
0 cost plus pricing.





A market structure with a few firms is known as
0 monopoly.
1 oligopoly.
0 monopolistic competition.
0 perfect competition.

Sellers are assumed to offer similar products in which type(s) of market structures?
0 both monopolistic competition and oligopoly
0 neither monopolistic competition nor oligopoly
0 monopolistic competition, but not oligopoly
1 oligopoly, but not monopolistic competition

Which of the following products is produced in an oligopoly market?
0 novels
0 movies
1 crude oil
0 computer games

Which of the following products is produced in a monopolistically competitive market?
1 compact discs
0 tennis balls
0 crude oil
0 None of the above is correct.

Oligopolists have the
0 highest profits when they cooperate, which they usually do.
1 highest profits when they cooperate, but find it difficult to cooperate.
0 highest profits when they care only about their own profits, which they usually do.
0 same profits whether they cooperate or care only about their own profits.


Price exceeds marginal cost
1 in monopoly markets and oligopoly markets.
0 only in monopoly markets.
0 only in oligopoly markets.
0 in neither oligopoly nor monopoly markets.

Suppose the market for mineral water is produced at a marginal cost of zero in a duopoly market with the demand schedule shown. If the duopolists collude they will produce a total of
0 200 units, which is more than if they did not collude.
0 200 units, which is less than if they did not collude.
0 160 units, which is more than if they did not collude.
1 160 units, which is less than if they did not collude.

Suppose the table shows the demand curve for crude oil and that the marginal cost of producing a unit of crude oil is $0.
0 The quantity produced in a competitive market is 600; the quantity produced by oligopolists that collude is 450.
1 The quantity produced in a competitive market is 600; the quantity produced by oligopolists that collude is 300.
0 The quantity produced in a competitive market is 450; the quantity produced by oligopolists that collude is 300.
0 None of the above is correct.

When oligopolists do not collude price
0 and output are higher than if they collude.
0 and output are lower than if they collude.
0 is higher and output is lower than if they collude.
1 is lower and output is higher than if they collude.

When oligopolists do not collude
0 price and output are the same as in a competitive market.
1 price is higher and output is lower than in a competitive market.
0 price is lower and output is higher than in a competitive market.
0 both price and output are higher than in a competitive market.

A Nash equilibrium occurs when:
0 oligopolists cooperate with each other.
1 economic actors who are interacting choose their best strategy given the strategies chosen by others.
0 the efficient allocation of resources is achieved by setting marginal revenue equal to marginal cost.
0 a monopolist is forced to produce the efficient level of output.

If an oligopolist raises production
0 both the output effect and the price effect tend to raise profits.
0 both the output effect and the price effect tend to decrease profits.
1 the output effect tends to raise profits while the price effect tends to decrease profits.
0 the output effect tends to decrease profits while the price effect tends to raise profits.

As the number of sellers in an oligopoly rises, the magnitude of the price effect
0 rises, and the output effect vanishes.
0 rises, but the output effect remains.
0 falls, and the output effect vanishes.
1 falls, but the output effect remains.

The prisoners’ dilemma helps to explain why cooperation
0 occurs in strategic situations.
1 is difficult to maintain in strategic situations.
0 is mutually beneficial in strategic situations.
0 never occurs in strategic situations.

Game theory is especially relevant to understanding
0 competitive markets.
0 monopoly markets.
1 oligopoly markets.
0 None of the above is correct.




A tit-for-tat strategy
1 performed the best of many strategies compared in a tournament.
0 requires that if one party reneges, that the other will follow her dominant strategy forever.
0 implies that oligopolists will produce closer to the socially efficient level than if each firm sticks to its dominant strategy.
0 makes it difficult for oligopolists to cooperate.

Suppose that a manufacturer requires that the retailers handling its product enter into resale price maintenance (RPM) agreements. This:
0 eliminates all competition among those retailers.
0 enables the manufacturer to charge a higher wholesale price to the retailers than would otherwise be possible.
1 may increase the amount of service that customers receive.
0 forces the retailers to accept a lower mark-up over the wholesale price than they would obtain without RPM.

Which of the following is incorrect?
0 To move the allocation of resources closer to the social optimum, policymakers should try to induce firms in an oligopoly to compete rather than cooperate.
0 For many centuries, judges in England and the United States have deemed agreements among competitors to reduce quantities and raise prices to be contrary to the public good.
0 It is unclear whether tying has adverse economic effects for society as a whole.
1 Predatory pricing may be considered a type of price discrimination.

The Sherman Act
0 made agreements to restrain trade among competitors unenforceable.
1 made agreements to restrain trade among competitors a criminal conspiracy.
0 allowed persons who could prove that they were damaged by illegal trade to sue the conspiring firms.
0 All of the above are correct.

To prevent discount retailers from free riding on information provided about goods by other retailers, wholesalers may use
1 resale price maintenance.
0 predatory pricing.
0 price discrimination.
0 tying.

Tying
0 has not yet been banned by the U.S. court system.
0 is probably used to prevent a free-rider problem.
0 is, according to most economists, likely used by firms to expand market power.
1 may be used as a form of price discrimination.

In a monopolistically competitive industry, profit-maximizing firms are price
0 takers who produce a quantity where price is equal to marginal cost.
0 takers who produce a quantity where price is greater than marginal cost.
0 setters who set price equal to marginal cost.
1 setters who set price above marginal cost.

When free entry is one of the attributes of a market structure, economic profits in the long run
0 are equal to implicit cost.
0 are greater than implicit cost.
1 are zero.
0 depend on whether or not firms produce identical products.

The profit-maximizing rule for a firm in a monopolistically competitive market is to produce the quantity at which
0 average revenue equals average total cost.
0 average total cost is at its minimum.
1 marginal revenue is equal to marginal cost.
0 marginal cost is at its minimum.



Product differentiation causes the seller of a good to face what type of demand curve?
0 upward sloping
1 downward sloping
0 horizontal
0 vertical

A monopolistically competitive firm chooses
1 the quantity of output to produce and the price of its output.
0 the quantity of output to produce, but the market determines price.
0 the price, but competition in the market determines the quantity.
0 only whether to enter or exit the market.

If firms in a monopolistically competitive market are earning negative economic profits, which of the following scenarios would best reflect the change facing incumbent firms as the market adjusts to its new equilibrium?
0 a downward shift in their marginal cost curve
0 an upward shift in their marginal cost curve
0 a decrease in demand
1 an increase in demand

As new firms enter a monopolistically competitive market, profits of existing firms
1 decline and product diversity in the market increases.
0 decline and product diversity in the market decreases.
0 rise and product diversity in the market decreases.
0 rise and product diversity in the market increases.

When a profit-maximizing firm in a monopolistically competitive market is producing the long-run equilibrium quantity,
1 its demand curve will be tangent to its average total cost curve.
0 it will be earning economic profits.
0 its average revenue will equal marginal cost.
0 All of the above are correct.

Since a firm in a monopolistically competitive market faces a
0 downward-sloping demand curve, it will always operate at efficient scale.
0 perfectly inelastic demand curve, it will always operate at efficient scale.
0 perfectly elastic demand curve, it will always operate at excess capacity.
1 downward-sloping demand curve, it will always operate at excess capacity.

Monopolistically competitive firms operate at
0 excess capacity, so that additional production would raise average total cost.
1 excess capacity, so that additional production would lower average total cost.
0 efficient scale, so that additional production would raise average total cost.
0 efficient scale, so that additional production would lower average total cost.

In the long run, a firm in a perfectly competitive market operates at
0 excess capacity and so do monopolistically competitive firms.
0 excess capacity while monopolistically competitive firm operate at efficient scale.
0 efficient scale and so do monopolistically competitive firms.
1 efficient scale while monopolistically competitive firms operate at excess capacity.

A monopolistically competitive market could be considered inefficient because
1 price exceeds marginal cost.
0 marginal cost exceeds average revenue.
0 firms in monopolistically competitive markets often collude.
0 mark-up pricing does not occur in any other market structure.

The deadweight loss that is associated with a monopolistically competitive market is a result of
0 operating in a constant cost industry.
1 pricing above marginal cost.
0 advertising costs.
0 pricing below marginal cost in order to increase market share.

The administrative burden of regulating price in a monopolistically competitive market is
0 small because firms produce at under-capacity.
0 small due to economies of scale.
1 large because of a large number of firms that produce differentiated products.
0 large because price is usually below marginal cost.

If regulators required firms in monopolistically competitive markets to set price equal to marginal cost,
1 firms would most likely experience economic losses.
0 firms would also operate at the efficient scale.
0 new firms would be likely to enter the market.
0 the most efficient firms are not likely to be affected.

When the loss from a business-stealing externality exceeds the gain from a product-variety externality,
0 market efficiency is likely to be enhanced by the entry of new firms.
1 there are likely to be too many firms in a monopolistically competitive market.
0 the market structure is likely to be above the efficient scale.
0 firms are more likely to operate at efficient scale.

If advertising decreases the elasticity of demand for a firm’s product, the firm is likely to
0 lower their advertising budget.
0 become more competitive.
1 charge a larger mark-up over marginal cost.
0 produce above the efficient scale.

In recent years, the courts have been
0 less lenient of advertising in order to enhance the ability of markets to allocate resources efficiently.
0 less lenient of advertising in order to decrease elasticity of demand for specific products.
0 more lenient of advertising in order to enhance brand loyalty.
1 more lenient of advertising in order to enhance competition in markets.

When firms in a monopolistically competitive market engage in price-related advertising, defenders of advertising argue that
0 the quality of products sold in the market always increases.
0 customers are less likely to be informed about other characteristics of the product.
0 new firms are discouraged from entering the market.
1 each firm has less market power.

Results of the study done by Lee Benham on advertising for eyeglasses suggests that
1 optometrists would enthusiastically endorse advertising restrictions.	
0 brand loyalty and market power in the eyeglass market was likely to be more pervasive in states that allowed advertising.
0 advertising restrictions were clearly beneficial to societal welfare.
0 eyeglass sales were more profitable in states that allowed advertising.

Defenders of advertising argue that it is not rational for profit-maximizing firms to spend money on advertising for products that have
0 low prices.
0 high prices.
0 superior quality.
1 inferior quality.

In some countries, brand name fast-food restaurants are not allowed to operate. Such restrictions are likely to
0 reduce barriers to entry in imperfect markets.
1 reduce the competitive nature of local fast-food markets.
0 enhance the social well-being of society.
0 enhance the choice set of consumers among local restaurants.

Viola uses only Log Cabin® brand maple syrup on her pancakes. She claims that even though generic maple syrups are cheaper, that they often seem watery. In a blind taste test Viola prefers a generic maple syrup. Her behavior is consistently explained by which of the following?
0 Consumers of brand-name products do not know their true preferences.
1 Consumers may choose brand-names to ensure the general quality of the product.
0 Consumers of brand-name products are likely to be uninformed about the quality of competing generic products.
0 None of the above is consistent.

Monopolistic competition is characterized by
0 few sellers and free entry.
0 few sellers and restricted entry.
1 many sellers and free entry.
0 many sellers and restricted entry.

Which of the following products is likely to be sold in a monopolistically competitive market?
0 crude oil
0 electricity
0 wheat
1 furniture

The demand curve of a monopolistically competitive firm is
1 downward sloping; as it also is for a monopolist.
0 downward sloping; as it also is for monopolists and perfectly competitive firms.
0 horizontal; as it also is for a perfectly competitive firm.
0 horizontal; as it also is for monopolists and perfectly competitive firms.

A monopolistically competitive firm maximizes profits by setting quantity and/or price according to the same rule as
0 a perfectly competitive firm.
1 a monopolist.
0 an oligopolist.
0 None of the above is correct.

A monopolistically competitive firm maximizes profits at the quantity where
0 average total cost = marginal cost.
0 average total cost = average revenue.
0 marginal revenue = average revenue.
1 marginal revenue = marginal cost.

A monopolistically competitive firm maximizes its profits and has profits greater than zero if
0 average total cost equals average revenue and average total cost is greater than price.
0 average total cost equals average revenue and average total cost is less than price.
0 marginal revenue equals marginal cost and average total cost is greater than price.
1 marginal revenue equals marginal cost and average total cost is less than price.

When price is above average total cost in a monopolistically competitive market
1 new firms enter the market, and the demand curves of existing firms shift left.
0 new firms enter the market and the demand curves of existing firms shifts right.
0 some firms exit the market and the demand curves of existing firms shifts left.
0 some firms exit the market and the demand curve of existing firms shifts right.

When a monopolistically competitive firm is in long-run equilibrium
1 economic profits will be zero.
0 marginal cost exceeds price.
0 marginal revenue exceeds marginal cost.
0 All of the above are correct.

Which of the following is correct?
0 Monopolistically competitive firms are price takers.
0 For monopolistically competitive firms the marginal revenue curve lies above the demand curve.
1 Under monopolistic competition, if price exceeds average total cost, firms will enter the market.
0 For monopolistically competitive firms, price equals marginal cost in the long run.

Consider the following two sentences. Because the demand curve of a monopolistically competitive firm is downward sloping, its marginal revenue is less than price. Because there is free entry into monopolistically competitive markets, in the long-run economic profits are driven to zero.
1 Both sentences are correct.
0 Both sentences are incorrect.
0 Only the first sentence is correct.
0 Only the second sentence is correct.

Consider the following two sentences. Both perfectly competitive and monopolistically competitive firms produce at the efficient scale. Perfectly competitive firms produce where price equals marginal cost, while monopolistically competitive firms produce where price is greater than marginal cost.
0 Both sentences are correct.
0 Neither sentence is correct.
0 Only the first sentence is correct.
1 Only the second sentence is correct.

A monopolistically competitive firm in the long run produces
1 a quantity less than the efficient scale.
0 at the efficient scale.
0 at a quantity above the efficient scale.
0 None of the above is necessarily correct, it depends on whether firms are making economic profits greater than zero.

In the long run profit-maximizing monopolistically competitive firms charge a price
0 above average total cost, but less than marginal cost.
0 above average total cost, but greater than marginal cost.
0 equal to average total cost, but less than marginal cost.
1 equal to average total cost, but greater than marginal cost.


Excess capacity arises under conditions of monopolistic competition because:
0 there is underutilization of resources and not enough firms.
1 the output produced does not minimize average total cost.
0 a monopolistically competitive firm produces more output than would be produced by a perfectly competitive firm.
0 there are too many goods chasing too few resources.

Which of the externalities created by the entry of a new firm exists under both perfect competition and monopolistic competition?
0 only the product-variety externality
0 only the business-stealing externality
0 both the product-variety externality and the business-stealing externality
1 neither the product-variety externality nor the business-stealing externality

Requiring monopolistic competitors to set price equal to marginal cost would
0 be a burden because there are so many producers of differentiated products.
0 cause them to make losses.
1 Both of the above are correct.
0 None of the above is correct.

The number of firms in a monopolistically competitive market is likely to be too small
1 if the product-variety externality is larger than the business-stealing externality.
0 if the business-stealing externality is larger than the product-variety externality.
0 if there are either business-stealing externalities or product-variety externalities.
0 under no conditions, monopolistically competitive markets always have a larger number of firms than is socially efficient.

Monopolistic competition results in inefficiency because
0 they can earn an economic profit in the short run.
0 price is not equal to average total cost in the long run.
0 firms exit the industry in response to losses.
1 price is greater than marginal cost.

In which of the following markets are advertising expenditures as a percent of revenues likely to be highest?
0 perfect competition.
0 monopoly.
1 monopolistic competition.
0 None of the above is necessarily likely to spend a larger share of revenues on advertising than the others.

Critics of advertising argue that advertising:
0 increases the elasticity of demand for the firm’s product.
1 impedes competition.
0 decreases demand for the firm’s product.
0 decreases supply of the firm’s product.

Suppose that by advertising, fast food places are able to increase the perception that their products are unique and so foster brand loyalty. The demand curves for the products of these firms become
0 more elastic, so markup increases.
0 more elastic, so markup decreases.
1 less elastic, so markup increases.
0 less elastic, so markup decreases.

Which of the following is incorrect?
0 Courts have recently concluded that restrictions on advertising by certain professions served mostly to curtail competition.
1 A study showed that the average price of eyeglasses was higher in states that allowed advertising than in states that did not.
0 By their willingness to spend money on advertising alone, firms signal that their products are not of inferior quality.
0 Advertising may lead to a more efficient allocation of resources.

Brand loyalty may
1 provide incentive for brand names to offer products of consistently high quality.
0 make demand for the brand’s product more elastic.
0 tend to push average total cost towards price.
0 All of the above are correct.

Factors of production are best defined as the
0 wages paid to the workforce.
0 goods and services sold in the market.
0 output produced from raw materials.
1 inputs used to produce goods and services.

Since a firm’s demand for a factor of production comes from its decision to supply a good in the market, we refer to this type of demand as
0 supplied demand.
1 derived demand.
0 secondary demand.
0 differentiated demand.

Most of the total income earned in the U.S. economy is ultimately paid to households in the form of
0 rent.
1 wages.
0 interest.
0 profit.

The production function describes the relationship between
0 inputs and cost.
0 outputs and profit.
1 inputs and outputs.
0 inputs and revenue.

The marginal product of labor is defined as the increase in
0 revenue per additional unit of input.
1 output per additional unit of input.
0 revenue per additional unit of output.
0 output per additional unit of revenue.

If hiring more workers causes each additional worker to contribute less to the total output,
0 diminishing profitability is present.
0 increasing marginal product is present.
1 diminishing marginal product is present.
0 diminishing marginal cost is present.

The value of the marginal product of labor is equal to the change in
0 marginal cost with the addition of the last worker.
0 total cost with the addition of the last worker.
0 total profit with the addition of the last worker.
1 total revenue with the addition of the last worker.

A competitive, profit-maximizing firm hires workers until
1 the value of the marginal product equals the wage.
0 unemployment rates are zero.
0 marginal product equals zero.
0 marginal revenue equals zero.

A worker’s contribution to a firm’s revenue is measured directly by the worker’s
0 contribution to output.
1 value of marginal product.
0 marginal product minus his/her wage.
0 marginal product multiplied by his/her wage.

A profit-maximizing competitive firm that experiences diminishing marginal product of labor is also experiencing
0 an upward-sloping demand for labor.
1 a downward-sloping demand for labor.
0 a perfectly elastic supply of labor.
0 a perfectly inelastic supply of labor.

If one observes a profit-maximizing firm increasing employment, it is possible to infer that the
0 firm is increasing its market share.
0 marginal product is rising.
0 wage exceeds the value of the marginal product.
1 value of the marginal product exceeds the wage.

If the price of airline tickets rises, what will happen to the demand curve for flight attendants?
0 It will shift to the left.
1 It will shift to the right.
0 There will be a movement along the curve.
0 It will remain unchanged; price changes do not shift demand curves.

Which of the following events would cause an increase in the labor supply curve?
1 more married women deciding to work
0 a lower Social Security retirement age
0 fewer married men deciding to work
0 tighter restrictions on immigration policy

When labor supply increases,
0 profit-maximizing firms reduce employment.
0 the marginal productivity of workers always increases.
0 wages increase as long as supply is upward sloping.
1 wages decrease as long as labor demand is downward sloping.

Which of the following could decrease labor demand?
0 an increase in migrant workers
0 a decrease in the labor supply
1 a decrease in demand for the final product produced by labor
0 an increase in the marginal productivity of workers

When firms are able to increase the amount of physical capital available to workers the
0 value of the marginal product of labor will decrease.
1 value of the marginal product of labor will increase.
0 final product price will increase.
0 marginal product of labor will decline.

When economists refer to a firm’s capital, they are likely to be using the term to describe the
0 markets for final goods and services.
0 amount of financing provided by the equity markets.
1 stock of equipment and buildings used in production.
0 amount of bank financing used by the firm.

The purchase price of land is
0 the price received from the flow of some land services.
1 the price a person pays to own the factor of production.
0 always less than the rental price.
0 the value of the land to the firm this time period.

The marginal product of any factor of production depends on
0 the price of the final good.
1 the quantity of the factor used.
0 the demand for the final good.
0 whether it is used to produce a good or a service.

As a result of severe flooding, a farmer loses one-half of his productive farmland. He should expect to see the marginal productivity of his land
1 increase.
0 decrease.
0 become negative.
0 remain unchanged.

The change in the supply of one factor
1 alters the earnings of all factors.
0 will not alter the marginal productivity of other factors, but may lower their price.
0 will not lower the price of other factors, but may alter their marginal productivity.
0 will not change the value of marginal product for other factors.

For the profit-maximizing competitive firm, the value of marginal product curve is
0 always rising.
0 the labor supply curve.
1 the labor demand curve.
0 falling only when marginal product is rising.


Which of the following would be considered capital?
1 Tiger Woods’ golf clubs
0 Greg Mankiw’s Ph.D.
0 a West Virginia coal mine
0 the Kansas City Chiefs’ defensive coach

The most important factor of product based on income earned in the U.S. economy is
0 land.
1 labor.
0 capital.
0 profit.

Derived demand refers to the fact that the demand for a factor of production is derived from the
0 supply of that factor of production.
0 level of a firm’s investment.
1 demand for the product it produces.
0 equilibrium price for that factor of production in the market.

A production function shows the relationship between the quantity of
0 inputs used to make a good and the cost associated with those inputs.
1 inputs used to make a good and the quantity of output of that good.
0 output of a good and the amount of profit a firm makes from the sale of that good.
0 inputs used to make a good and the total revenue generated by the sale of that good.

The value of the marginal product curve is downward sloping because
0 as firms hire additional workers, profit for the firm declines.
1 of the law of diminishing marginal product.
0 as firms hire additional workers, they are forced to hire less-qualified workers.
0 firms must lower the price of their product in order to sell more of it.

The increase in the amount of output from an additional unit of labor is called
0 derived demand.
0 diminishing marginal product.
0 factors of production.
1 the marginal product of labor.

For a profit-maximizing firm, the decision to employ an additional worker is based on how
0 long the worker plans to stay with the company.
1 profitable that worker will be to the firm.
0 much of the product the worker can produce.
0 much experience the worker has with that type of job.

The value of the marginal product of labor is equal to
0 total output divided by the quantity of labor.
0 the price of the output the labor produced.
1 the marginal product of labor times the price of the output.
0 the supply curve for labor.

The competitive, profit-maximizing firm’s demand for labor curve is
0 a horizontal line in perfectly competitive industries.
0 typically more elastic than the demand for the product the firms are producing.
0 equal to the supply of labor when markets are in equilibrium.
1 equal to the value of the marginal product of labor curve.

If the price of televisions falls, the value of the marginal product of workers making televisions will
1 definitely fall.
0 definitely rise.
0 not change.
0 fall or rise; we do not have enough information to know for certain.

If Kansans begin moving to Colorado to live because of the beautiful scenery, we would expect
0 firms to automatically relocate to Kansas.
0 the supply of labor to increase in Kansas and decrease in Colorado.
1 the supply of labor to increase in Colorado and decrease in Kansas.
0 wages to increase in Colorado and decrease in Kansas.

Plainco Corporations sells widgets for $3 each in a market that is perfectly competitive. Increasing the number of Plainco workers from 1,000 to 1,001 would cause output to rise from 615 to 625 widgets per day. Plainco should hire the 1,001st worker only when
1 the wage is $30 or less per day.
0 the wage is more than $30 per day.
0 the wage is $6.25 or less per day.
0 workers are willing to work on a piecework basis.

Which of the following would NOT increase the demand for labor?
0 an increase in the final product price
0 an increase in the amount of capital available for workers to use
0 an increase in the marginal productivity of workers
1 an increase in the wage labor receives

Each of the following is a key determinant of labor productivity EXCEPT the amount of
0 human capital acquired through education and training.
0 technological knowledge that is available.
0 tools and equipment that is available.
1 annual growth the company experiences.




The value of the marginal product curve is also a firm’s
0 total revenue curve.
0 supply curve for labor.
1 demand curve for labor.
0 production function.

If the price of Godiva chocolates increases, we would expect that this company’s wages will
0 rise and fewer workers will be hired.
0 fall and more workers will be hired.
1 rise and more workers will be hired.
0 fall and fewer workers will be hired.

Workers who acquire additional training or education should expect
1 a wage increase, since they now should be more productive.
0 to be fired, since they are now overqualified for their job.
0 to be required to train other workers for the firm.
0 to have less need for physical capital associated with their job.

An orange grower in Florida who loses most of his orange trees to a hard freeze should expect the marginal productivity of his capital to
0 increase.
1 decrease.
0 stay the same.
0 be negative.


An upward-sloping supply curve means that
0 workers prefer to work less when wages are high.
0 workers prefer to buy more leisure time when their incomes increase.
1 an increase in wages causes workers to increase the quantity of labor they supply.
0 workers will attempt to buy more leisure time and supply more labor when wages rise.

Given a downward-sloping demand for labor curve, if the supply of labor increases, we would expect
0 firms will choose to hire fewer workers.
0 a shortage of workers in most industries.
1 the equilibrium wage to fall.
0 the value of the marginal product of labor to rise.

The price paid to any factor of production
0 decreases when the demand for that factor increases.
1 is equal to the value of the marginal product of that factor.
0 increases as more of the factor is used in the production process.
0 will be greater than the value of the marginal product of that factor if the firm is a profit-maximizer.

When wage differentials are observed in competitive labor markets, the neoclassical theory of labor markets would predict
0 market discrimination.
0 that wage differences reflect social status.
0 that wages will converge over time.
1 a difference in the value of marginal product of labor.

The job of night watchman at the Punxsutawny Phil Groundhog museum is known to have a high wage. This is likely to be partially explained by the fact that the job
1 is likely to be incredibly dull.
0 is likely to be difficult.
0 is likely to require specialized skills.
0 provides plenty of time for self-reflection.

The term “compensating differential” refers to
0 the fact that workers that do similar work should be paid the same wage.
1 a wage difference that arises from nonmonetary characteristics of different jobs.
0 a wage difference that is distinguishable on the basis of monetary characteristics.
0 all of the above.

A recent law school graduate is considering two offers to practice law, one in California and one in Mississippi. Rumor has it that it is very difficult to pass the Mississippi bar exam and meet other certification requirements required by the Mississippi Attorney Association. Assuming all other things are equal, the attorney would expect
0 wages in California and Mississippi to be identical.
0 to make a lower wage in Mississippi.
1 to make a higher wage in Mississippi.
0 to be unable to predict the wage difference between Mississippi and California.

Public schoolteachers are known to have low wages. This is likely to be partially explained by the fact that
0 public schoolteacher jobs are easy.
0 public schoolteachers need very little money to live.
0 public schoolteachers are required to be college graduates.
1 many people perceive the job of public schoolteacher to have a high element of personal satisfaction.

Workers that have invested in human capital are
0 universally less productive in “dull” jobs.
1 likely to have a higher value of marginal product.
0 likely to have a lower value of marginal product.
0 not likely to have changed the value of their marginal product.

By 1998, the earnings gap between both men and women college graduates in the United States and those with only a high school diploma increased to
1 118 percent for men and 98 percent for women.
0 66 percent for men and 55 percent for women.
0 85 percent for men and 40 percent for women.
0 98 percent for men and 118 percent for women.

The statement “the rich get richer and the poor get poorer” is evident in the fact that
0 developing countries do not pay workers the value of their marginal product.
0 developed economies export high-skill jobs to developing countries.
0 the poor must shoulder an increasing amount of the public debt.
1 the earnings gap between high-skill jobs and low-skill jobs has increased over the last several years.

Economists who study labor markets have discovered that
1 ability, effort, and chance are likely to be significant contributors to wage differences.
0 only about 5 percent of wage differences are related to chance.
0 ability is not difficult to measure, but is largely insignificant in explaining wage differences.
0 work effort is difficult to measure, but is not likely to contribute much to an explanation of wage differences.

Empirical analysis of wage differences has found evidence
0 of a minor role played by omitted variables.
1 of a direct correlation between wages and attractiveness.
0 that the physical appearance of people in identical jobs is not likely to impact their wages.
0 that suggests that physical appearance-related wage differentials among males are vastly different than differentials among females.

According to the human capital view, education
0 alters work ethic.
0 leads to lower lifetime earnings.
1 enhances productivity.
0 is an indicator of raw intellect.

The fact that women are more likely to interrupt their careers to raise children reflects
0 further evidence that labor markets discriminate against women.
0 evidence that society under-values the role of women in the market place.
1 a potential market-based reason why average wages for men exceed those for women.
0 evidence that markets are inefficient at allocating labor resources.

Evidence suggests that business owners are generally
0 interested in profits, only when discrimination is illegal.
0 more interested in discrimination than in making a profit.
0 unable to determine the link between discrimination and profitability.
1 more interested in making a profit than in discriminating against a particular group.

Discriminatory hiring practices can be expected, even if markets are competitive, as a result of
0 lower costs of hiring.
1 customer preferences.
0 a perfectly elastic market demand.
0 unrestricted entry and exit in markets.

The issue of comparable worth is one in which
0 all workers should receive the same wages in an economy.
0 markets are allowed to determine a worker’s rate of compensation.
1 workers with “comparable” education, experience, responsibility, and working conditions would be compensated at similar wage rates.
0 all workers should be provided an opportunity to make a comparable contribution to the economy.

Which of the following scenarios would serve to decrease the demand for unskilled labor in our country?
1 increased international trade with countries where unskilled labor is more plentiful
0 increased demand for goods produced by unskilled labor
0 increased productivity gains among the unskilled laborers
0 increased supply of migrant workers

Why do major league baseball players get paid more than minor league players?
0 The higher wage reflects a compensating differential.
1 Major league players are better athletes.
0 The higher wage is often due to educational discrepancies.
0 Playing in the major leagues is less pleasant than playing in the minor leagues.

Which of the following statements represents the idea behind signaling in education?
0 Education can turn an unproductive person into a productive person.
1 The more naturally productive someone is the more they are inclined to educate themselves.
0 Most college graduates wouldn’t be half as productive if it were not for the years they spend in the classroom.
0 all of the above

Studies have shown that nonunion workers earn about
1 10 to 20 percent less than union workers.
0 10 to 20 percent more than union workers.
0 40 to 50 percent more than union workers.
0 40 to 50 percent less than union workers.

How does the theory of efficiency wages explain above-equilibrium wages?
0 Employers are forced to pay higher wages in efficient markets.
0 Workers get a raise in wage when they prove they are increasing their productivity.
0 Workers demand higher wages to compensate for poor fringe benefits.
1 Employers give their workers a higher wage in the hopes that it will lead to increased productivity.

Racial segregation of streetcars in the southern cities was largely opposed by
1 streetcar firms.
0 government officials.
0 Sherman antitrust laws.
0 all of the above.

What was the main reason the gender gap did not narrow during the post-war years?
0 Women added more to marginal product than men.
0 Employers were required to pay men more to do the same job women were doing.
1 Many of the women who entered the labor force had not worked for quite some time and therefore lacked experience.
0 all of the above

Economists would argue that the gender wage gap is narrowing because of
0 efficiency wages.
0 comparable worth legislation.
0 decreased productivity among male workers.
1 increased training among women.

Laws across the United States have provided a way for economists to study the effects of education on wages because of differences from state-to-state in
0 antitrust laws.
0 minimum wage laws.
1 the legal age requirement for school drop-outs.
0 legalized gambling.

Students who are required to finish more schooling have been found to
1 earn a higher wage.
0 be happier with their career choices.
0 suffer from unemployment volatility.
0 be more likely to feel the effects of minimum wage increases.

Tiger Woods, a famous golfer, earns more than a university professor. The neoclassical theory of labor markets would suggest that
0 Although many university professors play golf, it is just a hobby and not a profession.
0 Tiger Woods has received more formal education than a university professor.
1 Tiger Woods and university professors each earn a wage equal to the value they contribute to the economy.
0 Sports are generally considered more important in an economy than education.

Which of the following statements is NOT true?
0 The wage for difficult jobs exceeds that for easy jobs.
1 The wage for fun jobs exceeds that for dull jobs.
0 The wage for dangerous jobs exceeds that for safe jobs.
0 The wage for skilled jobs exceeds that for unskilled jobs.

Receptionists generally have low paying jobs because
0 receptionist jobs are considered difficult.
0 receptionists are required to have a college degree.
1 receptionist jobs are perceived to be relatively easy.
0 many people perceive the job as having an element of personal satisfaction.

A high-rise construction worker is typically paid a higher wage than a carpenter who builds residential housing primarily because
0 carpenters are more likely to work a standard day shift where high-rise construction workers generally work at night.
0 carpenter jobs are perceived as fun and easy.
1 high-rise construction jobs are potentially more dangerous than carpenter jobs.
0 high-rise construction jobs require years of training while building residential housing requires no special training.

If the night-shift workers at a Ford assembly plant make more than the day-shift workers at the same plant, this is because of
0 an inefficient labor market in the car industry.
1 a compensating differential.
0 a discriminatory wage practice.
0 a negative externality in this labor market.

Human capital
0 is a form of economic rent.
0 is a new term economists have devised for robotics technology.
0 claims that employers make hiring decisions solely on the basis of education credentials.
1 is knowledge and skill acquired through education and training.

The wage difference between jobs that require education and those that don’t
0 is not likely to be related to productivity differences.
1 encourages workers to bear the cost of acquiring education.
0 is a barrier to obtaining an education.
0 does not affect the supply of workers in the different labor markets.

Skill differences account for some of the differences in wages across occupations because
0 high-skilled workers are more pleasant to work with than low-skilled workers.
1 international trade has altered the relative demand for skilled and unskilled labor.
0 there is an inverse relationship between human capital and economic rent.
0 lower skilled workers are suffering from discrimination.

Studies have documented that the earnings gap between low-skill workers and high-skill workers has
1 increased over the past two decades.
0 not changed as the wages of both groups have steadily increased.
0 remained relatively constant over the past two decades.
0 decreased over the past two decades because of lower college enrollments.

Which of the following would NOT explain the “beauty premium?”
0 Beauty is an indirect measure of other types of ability.
1 Physical beauty is associated with a worker’s marginal productivity in every occupation.
0 Good looks are useful in any job in which workers present themselves to the public.
0 Beauty is a type of discrimination.

The human capital view of education is that it
0 can reduce job discrimination.
1 enhances productivity.
0 will decrease job mobility.
0 is a signal of natural intelligence or ability.

The signaling view of education is that it
0 alters work ethic.
1 signals natural ability.
0 enhances productivity.
0 always leads to high-wage jobs.

When differences in average wages occur in a labor market, economists agree that these differences
0 occur solely because of differences in productivity between genders and races.
1 do not alone provide conclusive evidence of discrimination.
0 are exclusively an economic, rather than political, phenomenon.
0 provide conclusive evidence of broad patterns of discrimination on the basis of gender and race.

When employers in competitive product markets choose to discriminate when hiring workers, they will
1 likely go out of business.
0 have a larger pool of potential employees from which to choose.
0 have an opportunity to drive out competitors and increase market share.
0 realize an increase in economic profit because of the low cost of labor.

Factors that affect a worker’s wage but are difficult to measure include
1 ability, effort and chance.
0 gender and race.
0 education level, age and job characteristics.
0 years of experience and geographic location.

Streetcar seating that was segregated by race was opposed by firms that ran the streetcars because
0 railroad companies were not required to segregate by race.
0 streetcar drivers could not remember who sat where.
0 white passengers complained because they were required to sit in the back of the cars.
1 segregated seating was less profitable than streetcar seating that didn’t have restrictions.

A 1988 study of the professional basketball players’ market found that
0 sports with strong player associations do not experience wage discrimination.
1 consumer driven wage discrimination between black and white basketball players may exist.
0 the marginal product of basketball players could not be determined since it is a team sport.
0 wage discrimination in basketball may be eliminated with government regulations.

Which of the following is a valid economic criticism of comparable worth?
0 There is no employment discrimination in the United States.
1 Comparable worth distorts labor market signals, thereby creating labor surpluses and shortages.
0 Comparable worth may attract males into traditionally female-dominated occupations.
0 Women are less likely than men to be heads of households.

The idea behind signaling in education is that
0 education can turn an unproductive person into a productive person.
1 more productive people are more inclined to educate themselves.
0 many college graduates attended college in an attempt to land an “easier” job.
0 most college graduates wouldn’t be half as productive if it were not for the years they spend in the classroom.

The superstar phenomenon occurs in markets
0 that can limit the supply of participants in the market so that competition is diminished.
1 that make it possible for the best producer to supply every customer at low cost.
0 where technology is not allowed to assist or improve the natural ability of the superstar.
0 where the ability and effort of market participants are relatively equal.

Each of the following tend to create above-equilibrium wages as well as a shortage of jobs EXCEPT
0 unions.
0 efficiency wages.
1 education.
0 minimum wage laws.

Economists are skeptical that discrimination is employer driven because
0 employers are profit maximizers.
0 there is a cost advantage for the non-discriminating firm.
0 if there is no difference in productivity, employers choose to hire the cheapest labor available.
1 All of the above are reasons.

Factors which are likely to have influenced the declining gender wage gap include each of the following EXCEPT:
0 Women are gaining more continuous work experience.
0 Women are delaying marriage.
1 Women are working jobs that have more favorable working conditions.
0 Fertility rates have fallen.

Wage differences that exist between well-educated workers and less-educated workers can be thought of as
0 unfair by most economists.
0 another form of discrimination in the labor market.
1 a compensating differential for the cost of becoming educated.
0 difficult to explain in a market economy.

A natural experiment which allows economists to examine the effect of education on wages and productivity exists because of
0 minimum wage laws.
0 government-subsidized higher education.
0 anti-discrimination legislation.
1 differences in state laws for school attendance.

A person’s earnings depends on
0 how well the economy is doing.
0 whether or not the economy is experiencing inflation.
1 the supply and demand for that person’s labor.
0 how much profit that person’s employer is able to make.

Labor earnings make up what part of total income in the U.S. economy?
0 all of it
1 three-fourths
0 one-half
0 one-fourth

If income were equally distributed across all families,
0 all families would more likely be rich than poor.
0 the relative share of income would decline as the number of families are increased.
0 the relative share of income would increase as the number of families are increased.
1 75 percent of the families would receive exactly 75 percent of the income.

Based on data from 1998, what percent of all income in the United States did the top fifth of all families receive?
0 4 percent
0 32 percent
1 47 percent
0 78 percent

Evidence suggests that the women’s movement has
1 increased income inequality across households.
0 decreased income inequality across households.
0 had no effect on the distribution of income across households.
0 decreased the importance of traditional measures of income inequality.

In the United States the poverty rate is a measure of the
0 number of people whose annual income is less than $18,000.
0 number of people whose annual household income is less than $39,000.
1 percentage of people whose income falls below an identified income standard.
0 percentage of government expenditures spent on programs to relieve poverty.

Over the past few years, growth in average income has
0 eliminated poverty.
1 failed to decrease the poverty rate.
0 decreased the poverty rate.
0 increased the poverty rate in some years, and decreased it in other years.

Measures of poverty that fail to account for the value of in-kind transfers
1 overstate the actual poverty rate.
0 understate the actual poverty rate.
0 have little effect on the validity of reported poverty rates.
0 are generally more reliable in accounting for annual variation in actual poverty rates.

The life cycle effect characterizes a life-time income profile in which income
0 falls during the early years of market activity and peaks at retirement.
1 rises as a worker gains maturity and experience.
0 rises and falls in conjunction with the business cycle.
0 tends to follow a seasonal pattern.

Saving and borrowing behavior is indicative of a family
0 that is most likely to be poor.
0 that has a difficult time balancing its standard of living.
0 that is most likely to be on the upper end of the income distribution.
1 adjusting its standard of living to reflect transitory changes in income.

A family’s ability to buy goods and services depends largely on its
1 permanent income.
0 in-kind transfers.
0 lifetime income.
0 transitory income.

Economic mobility refers to the
1 movement of people among income classes.
0 movement of resources from one industry to another.
0 ability of families to freely relocate to find good jobs.
0 government’s attempt to distribute monetary assistance to areas most in need.

Whether or not policymakers should try to make our society more egalitarian is largely a matter of
0 egalitarian principles.
0 economic efficiency.
1 political philosophy.
0 enhanced opportunity.

According to utilitarians, the ultimate objective of private and public actions is to
0 enhance the income of the rich.
0 provide for the betterment of the poor.
1 maximize the sum of individual utility.
0 ensure an egalitarian distribution of income.

The utilitarian case for redistributing income is based on the assumption of
0 rising marginal utility.
0 collective consensus.
0 a notion of fairness engendered by equality.
1 diminishing marginal utility.

When the government taxes income as part of a redistribution program
0 the poor pay higher taxes.
1 incentives to earn income are diminished.
0 the rich always benefit more than the poor.
0 incentives for the poor to work are enhanced.

In the parable of the leaky bucket, a fundamental problem with government redistribution programs is identified. As long as the government only has “leaky buckets” at its disposal
0 equality of economic opportunity is an unattainable goal.
0 affirmative action programs are doomed to failure.
1 it should not try to reach complete equality in income.
0 full egalitarian policies will always dominate competing policy options.

Liberalism is founded on a premise that behind a “veil of ignorance”
0 no one would be considered in an “original position.”
0 justice is a matter of political philosophy.
0 justice can never be agreed upon.
1 everyone would agree to “just” rules to reallocate income.

The liberalism rule called the maximin criterion suggests that the focus of social policy would be to
1 elevate the well-being of those at the bottom of income distribution.
0 elevate the well-being of all workers.
0 ensure an egalitarian distribution of income.
0 expropriate the factors of production from the capitalist class.

A libertarian is likely to argue that
0 society is responsible for ensuring an equal distribution of income.
0 outcomes always dominate processes.
0 government has no role in the economy.
1 only individual members of society can earn income.

Minimum wage laws
0 increase the efficiency of labor markets.
1 force a market imbalance between the supply and demand for labor.
0 are typically associated with a rise in employment among the poor.
0 are most effective at alleviating poverty when labor demand is highly elastic.

Evidence suggests that
1 the longer a family is on welfare, the harder it is to get off welfare.
0 legislation designed to limit the time a family can be on welfare will never be passed.
0 the best way to deter immigrants is to make legal aliens ineligible for many welfare benefits.
0 welfare dependency is embraced by over 80% of new welfare recipients.

Proponents of welfare reform claim that programs for the poor which do not establish a time limit on recipient benefits harm children by
0 forcing mothers to work outside the home.
0 encouraging child abuse by absent fathers.
1 encouraging a psychological dependency on government programs.
0 all of the above.

A negative income tax system would
0 eliminate tax progressivity.
0 make taxes more regressive.
0 sever the link between tax policy and income distribution.
1 collect from high-income households and give transfers to low-income households.

Assume that the government proposes a negative income tax that calculates taxes owed by the formula, TAXES OWED = (1/3 / INCOME) – 10,000. A family that earns an income of $60,000 will
1 pay $10,000 in taxes.
0 receive a subsidy of $3,000.
0 receive an income subsidy of $10,000.
0 neither pay taxes nor receive an income subsidy.

Three-fourths of total income in the U.S. economy comes from
0 rental income.
1 labor earnings.
0 returns to capital.
0 corporate profit.

One way to describe the distribution of income in the economy is to
0 calculate the bell curve that exists in any economy.
0 use the International Income Distribution Standards that were established in 1992.
0 divide the population into two categories—the rich and the poor.
1 calculate the percentage of families that fall into each of seven income categories.

U.S. income data from 1998 show that the bottom one-fifth of all families received
1 4 percent of all income.
0 10 percent of all income.
0 22 percent of all income.
0 36 percent of all income.

Over the past several decades, the women’s movement may be responsible for
0 less inequality in family incomes.
0 high-income men marrying low-income women.
0 rich households becoming poorer.
1 more inequality in family incomes.

When the income distribution of the U.S. is compared to that of other countries, it shows that the U.S. has a
0 distribution that is one of the most equal income distributions.
0 distribution that is one of the most unequal income distributions.
1 distribution that is somewhere in the middle of the pack.
0 higher percentage of poor families, and a higher percentage of rich families than most countries.

The poverty line is equal to the
0 average income of the bottom one-fifth of all income recipients.
0 average income of the bottom one-tenth of all income recipients.
0 cost of an adequate diet for a family multiplied by six.
1 cost of an adequate diet for a family multiplied by three.

The annual adjustment to the poverty line reflects
0 family size.
1 price changes.
0 changes in what foods are included in an adequate diet.
0 the number of people currently on public assistance.

The number of families living in poverty in the U.S. tends to be overstated by about
0 2 percent.
0 5 percent.
1 10 percent.
0 15 percent.

In-kind transfers
0 can only be provided by the Federal government.
1 are goods and services given to the poor rather than cash.
0 increase the number of families below the poverty line since no money is given.
0 are taken into account when determining the degree of income inequality in the economy.

Transitory income refers to
0 the regular pattern of income variation over a person’s life.
0 a person’s normal income.
0 the regular pattern of income variation that peaks around age 50.
1 temporary increases and decreases in income.

Income and saving rates are highest for people who are
0 retired.
1 middle-aged.
0 young and single.
0 married with young children.

The life-cycle theory would suggest that because people can borrow and save to smooth out changes in income, their standard of living depends more on
1 lifetime income rather than annual income.
0 annual income rather than lifetime income.
0 annual family income rather than annual personal income.
0 average monthly income rather than annual income.

The new formula being considered by the U.S. Census Bureau to compute the income threshold for the poverty line would
0 not change the poverty line, but the formula would be easier to compute.
0 decrease the poverty line and decrease the number of families below the poverty line.
1 increase the poverty line and increase the number of families below the poverty line.
0 increase the poverty line, but the number of families considered poor would not change since the cost of living is continuously rising.

A family’s ability to buy goods and services depends largely on its normal or average income which is its
0 transitory income.
0 in-kind transfers.
1 permanent income.
0 lifetime income.

Studies have shown that if a father earns 20 percent above his generation’s average income, his son will most likely earn
0 relatively the same income as his father.
0 less than his father since the son has less incentive to work with a wealthy father.
0 22 percent below his generation’s average income.
1 8 percent above his generation’s average income.

Evidence indicates that
1 most of the poor are poor for short periods of time.
0 education is unrelated to poverty.
0 most of the poor are elderly.
0 working does not reduce one’s chance of being poor.

The political philosophy according to which the government should punish crimes and enforce voluntary agreements but not redistribute income is
0 liberalism.
0 utilitarianism.
0 communism.
1 libertarianism.

Because of diminishing marginal utility,
0 the rich receive more satisfaction than the poor from the last dollar they spend since the rich have more to spend.
0 more of something is always preferred to less of something, especially money.
0 the poor are less efficient at spending money than the rich.
1 the poor receive more satisfaction than the rich from the last dollar they spend.

Because of distorted incentives, when the government tries to maximize total utility in the economy by redistributing income, the policy will
0 always achieve a full egalitarian society in a market economy.
1 always fall short of a full egalitarian society.
0 can only be achieved with a progressive income tax system.
0 achieve a full egalitarian society only if sufficient funds are transferred from the rich to the poor.

Rawl’s maximin criterion suggests that income transferred from the rich to the poor should aim to
0 promote an egalitarian distribution of income.
1 maximize the well-being of the worst off person in society.
0 maximize the well-being of each person in society.
0 reduce the disincentives to work and save that redistribution policy creates.

Libertarians would condone government involvement in an economy to ensure
0 a distribution of income as equal as possible.
1 equal opportunity, but not an equal distribution of income.
0 the well-being of the least fortunate in society.
0 an objectively-determined just society.

Government welfare programs are often criticized because
0 studies have shown that these programs encourage single-parent households.
0 the government spends more each year on welfare programs than it does on national defense.
0 most people on the welfare roles today are actually ineligible to receive the benefits.
1 they create incentives for people to become needy.

Opponents of the 1996 law that limits the time a family can receive welfare benefits believe that
1 children will become innocent victims of this law.
0 any money saved by lowering welfare roles will be diverted to defense spending.
0 welfare is the best system the government has to distribute income to the really poor.
0 little evidence exists that staying on welfare for long periods of time is detrimental to a family.

Assume that the government proposes a negative income tax that calculates taxes owed by the formula, TAXES OWED = (1/2 / INCOME) – 15,000. For a family earning $20,000 of income, how would this negative income tax affect them?
0 They will receive an income subsidy of $10,000.
1 They will receive an income subsidy of $5,000.
0 They will pay a tax of $5,000.
0 They will not be required to pay any tax.

Almost everyone agrees that the more equally policymakers attempt to divide the “pie” the
0 more likely the middle class will be to “starve.”
0 larger the “pie” becomes.
1 smaller the “pie” becomes.
0 “fatter” the rich become.

The slope of the budget constraint is determined by the
0 level of income of the consumer.
1 relative price of commodities represented on the axes.
0 preferences of a consumer.
0 endowment of productive resources.

Consumer preferences are typically represented by
0 cost curves.
0 supply curves.
1 indifference curves.
0 budget constraints.



The slope of an indifference curve is
0 constant.
0 positive, since indifference curves slope upward.
1 equal to the marginal rate of substitution.
0 the same as the slope of the budget constraint at every point.

The amount of a good an individual has 
0 is only affected by prices.
0 is only affected by income.
0 will not affect the marginal rate of substitution.
1 affects the rate at which she is willing to trade.

As long as a consumer is on the same indifference curve
0 she is unable to decide which bundle of goods to choose.
1 she is indifferent among the points on that indifference curve.
0 her preferences will not affect the marginal rate of substitution.
0 she is indifferent to all points which lie on any other indifference curves.

When indifference curves are bowed inward toward the origin,
0 it is unlikely that consumers will be willing to engage in trade.
0 people can only increase satisfaction by consuming more of all commodities.
0 people are less inclined to trade away goods that they have an abundance of.
1 the marginal rate of substitution decreases as a consumer moves down an indifference curve.

The highest indifference curve that a consumer can reach is the one
0 farthest from the origin.
0 that intersects the budget constraint in at least two places.
1 that is tangent to the budget constraint.
0 all of the above.

Which of the following is NOT a property of indifference curves?
1 Lower indifference curves are preferable to higher indifference curves.
0 Indifference curves are bowed inward toward the origin.
0 Indifference curves do not cross.
0 Indifference curves are downward sloping.

When two goods are perfect substitutes they will have 
1 linear indifference curves.
0 indifference curves that cross.
0 indifference curves that are right angles.
0 indifference curves with a positive slope.

When economists describe preferences, they sometimes use the concept of 
0 income.
1 utility.
0 prices.
0 markets.

An optimizing consumer will select a consumption bundle in which the
0 utility exceeds price.
0 marginal rate of substitution is equal to income.
0 ratio of expenditure shares equals the marginal rate of substitution.
1 marginal rate of substitution is equal to the relative price.

At the optimum
0 the budget constraint would have a slope of 1.
0 it is still possible for the consumer to increase his consumption of both goods.
1 the slope of the indifference curve is equal to the slope of the budget constraint.
0 the indifference curve would intersect the budget constraint at its center.

When a budget constraint shifts out
0 the consumer is worse off.
1 the consumer can now reach a higher indifference curve.
0 it could only have been caused by an increase in income.
0 it could only have been caused by an increase in the price of one of the goods.

Assume that a college student purchases Diet Coke and Snickers. The substitution effect associated with a decrease in the price of a Snickers will result in
0 only a decrease in the consumption of Diet Coke.
0 only an increase in the consumption of Snickers.
0 a decrease in the consumption of Snickers and an increase in the consumption of Diet Coke.
1 an increase in the consumption of Snickers and a decrease in the consumption of Diet Coke. 

Violations to the law of demand are assumed to occur
1 only when goods are Giffen goods.
0 commonly.
0 only when the substitution effect dominates the income effect.
0 All of the above are possible answers.

If an in-kind transfer forces the recipient to consume more of the good than he would choose with a cash transfer of equal value, then the recipient
0 would prefer the in-kind transfer over a cash transfer of equal dollar value.
1 would prefer a cash transfer of equal dollar value.
0 is indifferent between a cash transfer and an in-kind transfer.
0 Not enough information about the consumer is given to answer this question. 

The theory of consumer choice provides a more complete understanding of demand by examining 
1 the tradeoffs people face in their role as consumers.
0 the role of suppliers and how they attempt to maximize profits.
0 individuals who are unaware of how to maximize their well-being.
0 individuals who make irrational consumption decisions.

A budget constraint shows
0 consumption bundles that makes a consumer equally satisfied.
0 the prices a consumer must pay for two products he consumes.
0 the rate at which a consumer is willing to trade one good for another.
1 the various consumption bundles that a consumer can afford with a given income. 

A point outside a consumer’s budget constraint
1 cannot be reached given the consumer’s current income.
0 shows that the consumer is not spending all of her income.
0 would represent the consumer’s optimum. 
0 means that one of the two goods must be an inferior good.

Which of the following leads to a parallel shift of the budget line?
0 a 10 percent increase in the price of both goods
0 a 20 percent reduction in the price of both goods
1 a 30 percent increase in income
0 a 10 percent increase in the price of one of the goods only

The relative price of two goods equals
0 the marginal rate of substitution.
0 the slope of an indifference curve.
1 the slope of the budget constraint.
0 consumer optimum.

For a consumer, any point on the same indifference curve yields
0 different levels of satisfaction.
0 constraints faced by the consumer.
1 the same level of satisfaction.
0 an income level sufficient to make an individual happy.


A consumer who reduces his consumption of one good will remain on the same indifference curve only if he
0 doesn’t change his consumption of another good.
0 reduces his consumption of another good.
1 increases his consumption of another good.
0 He will not be able to stay on the same indifference curve if he reduces his consumption of one good.

The marginal rate of substitution
1 measures the rate at which a consumer is willing to trade one good for another.
0 is always constant.
0 is the slope of a consumer’s budget constraint.
0 identifies the point where the budget constraint and the indifference curve are tangent.

Because consumers prefer more consumption to less, they
0 prefer indifference curves with positive slopes.
0 prefer lower indifference curves to higher indifference curves.
1 prefer higher indifference curves to lower indifference curves.
0 are generally unable to place all consumption bundles on an indifference curve.

Indifference curves are bowed inward because people are 
0 unwilling to substitute one good for another.
1 more willing to give up goods that they have in abundance.
0 less willing to give up goods that they have in abundance.
0 generally willing to consume more of one good over another.

Two goods that are perfect complements will have indifference curves that are
1 right angles.
0 intersecting.
0 straight lines.
0 upward sloping.

When a consumer reaches the highest indifference curve possible, she has maximized her
0 income.
1 utility.
0 preferences.
0 substitution effect.

The consumer’s optimum occurs where the
1 highest attainable indifference curve is just tangent to the budget line.
0 consumer maximizes his satisfaction and has some income left over.
0 consumer buys equal amounts of both goods.
0 consumer will be on the indifference curve lying closest to the origin.


An inferior good is any good that
0 is of lesser quality than a normal good.
0 an increase in income increases consumption of the good.
1 an increase in income decreases consumption of the good.
0 a rational consumer would not generally choose to buy.



Economic theory suggests that demand curves can sometimes slope upward 
1 if a good is a strongly inferior good with a dominant income effect.
0 when the supply curve for the good is downward sloping.
0 when consumers no longer prefer more to less.
0 if a good is a normal good with a dominant income effect.


A Giffen good has
1 an upward-sloping demand curve.
0 a downward-sloping demand curve.
0 a horizontal demand curve.
0 a vertical demand curve.

The theory of consumer choice can be used to 
0 understand producers’ response to demand.
1 derive a demand curve.
0 clarify why consumers generally prefer less of a good to more.
0 show how individuals’ activities determine the preferences of a society.

If an individual’s labor supply curve is backward bending this would suggest that he will
0 work more as wage rates rise.
1 work less as wage rates rise.
0 work the same no matter what the wage rate.
0 demand more leisure as wage rates fall.

Rational consumers who are saving for retirement may choose to save less when interest rates rise if 
0 they are likely to inherit a large sum of money.
0 they realize that they will need much less money after retirement to maintain the same standard of living. 
0 the substitution effect dominates the income effect.
1 the income effect dominates the substitution effect.

Macroeconomics is the study of
0 market regulation.
0 money and financial markets.
1 economy-wide phenomena.
0 how households and firms make decisions and how they interact.

For the economy as a whole
0 expenditure exceeds income because of taxes.
1 income must equal expenditure.
0 income exceeds expenditure because of saving.
0 expenditure exceeds income because of the government budget deficit.

A circular-flow diagram is used to describe 
0 how banks create money.
0 how weather patterns affect the economy.
0 the most efficient organization of the work process.
1 the flow of income and expenditures in an economy.

Gross Domestic Product is defined as the market value of
0 all final goods and services produced by a country’s citizens in a given period of time.
0 every good and service produced within a country in a given period of time.
1 all final goods and services produced within a country in a given period of time.
0 all goods and services produced by a country’s citizens in a given period of time.

Goods and services produced and sold illegally are
1 excluded from GDP.
0 included in GDP.
0 included in GDP only if income from the sales is reported on income tax returns.
0 included in GDP to the extent that they can be measured.

Latrell decides to hire Cynthia to mow his lawn, instead of mowing it himself, as he is accustomed to doing. As a result of this transaction, GDP
0 will decrease.
1 will increase.
0 will be unaffected because the same service would be performed in either case.
0 could increase or decrease, depending on whether Cynthia mows Latrell’s lawn as well as Latrell could mow it himself.

The value of intermediate goods that are sold is
1 not added to GDP.
0 added to GDP if they were produced in a previous year.
0 added to GDP if they were produced and sold in the current year.
0 added to GDP unless they are sold at a loss.

An American company owns a fast-food store in Lima, Peru. The value of the goods and services produced in the store are included
0 in both Peruvian GDP and U.S. GDP.
1 in Peruvian GDP, but not U.S. GDP.
0 in U.S. GDP, but not Peruvian GDP.
0 partly in Peruvian GDP and partly in U.S. GDP.

National income is defined as 
0 all income produced within a country.
0 the income received by the national government.
0 the total income earned by a nation’s residents from the production of goods and services within the borders of the country.
1 the total income earned by a nation’s residents in the production of goods and services.

The government reports that GDP “increased by 2 percent in the last quarter.”
0 GDP increased by 10 percent for the year.
0 GDP increased at an annual rate of 2 percent during the last quarter.
1 GDP increased at an annual rate of 8 percent during the last quarter.
0 GDP increased at an annual rate of .5 percent during the last quarter.

The four components of GDP are consumption,
0 money supply, government purchases, and exports.
0 investment, transfer payments, and imports.
1 investment, government purchases, and net exports.
0 investment, government purchases, and foreign exchange.

In macroeconomics, investment is spending on
0 real estate and financial assets.
1 capital equipment, inventories, and structures, including new housing.
0 stocks, bonds, and other financial assets.
0 capital equipment, inventories, and structures, excluding household purchases of new housing.

Government purchases include spending on goods and services by 
1 local, state and federal governments.
0 the federal government only.
0 local and state governments, but not the federal government.
0 state and federal governments only.

If exports are smaller than imports, net exports
0 are positive.
1 are negative.
0 will increase GDP.
0 are larger than imports.

Transfer payments are
0 included in GDP because they represent income to individuals.
0 not included in GDP unless they represent unemployment compensation.
0 included in GDP because the income will be spent for consumption.
1 not included in GDP because they do not represent payments for currently produced goods or services.

In 1998, U.S. GDP was about
0 $85 trillion.
1 $8.5 trillion.
0 $850 billion.
0 $85 billion.

If total spending rises from one year to the next, then
0 net exports must be falling.
0 prices at which goods and services are sold must be higher.
0 the economy must be producing a larger output of goods and services.
1 either the economy must be producing a larger output of goods and services, or the prices at which goods and services are sold must be higher, or both.

The best measure of a country’s production of goods and services is
1 real GDP.
0 real NNP.
0 nominal GDP.
0 nominal GNP.

Real GDP is the production of goods and services valued at
0 current year prices.
0 future year prices.
1 constant prices.
0 the ratio of current year prices to constant year prices.

The GDP deflator is the ratio of
0 nominal GDP to real GDP.
0 real GDP to nominal GDP.
1 nominal GDP to real GDP multiplied by 100.
0 real GDP to nominal GDP multiplied by 100.

If the GDP deflator is 150 and nominal GDP is $9,000 billion, then real GDP is
0 $135 billion.
0 $1,350 billion.
0 $600 billion.
1 $6,000 billion.

If the GDP deflator was 100 in the base year of 2000, and was 105 in 2002, we can say that
1 the price level increased by 5 percent from 2000 to 2002.
0 the price level increased by 105 percent from 2000 to 2002.
0 the price level increased by 205 percent from 2000 to 2002.
0 we cannot judge price increases from changes in the GDP deflator.

GDP is used as the basic measure of a society’s economic well-being. A better measure of the economic well-being of individuals in society is
0 the consumption component of GDP.
1 GDP per person.
0 government expenditures per person.
0 the level of business investment.

GDP per person is not a perfect measure of the well-being of individuals in society because it excludes
0 the role of government.
0 the value of investment in real capital.
0 the value of money.
1 things like leisure time, the value of goods and services produced at home, and environmental quality.

International studies of the relationship between GDP per person and quality of life measures, such as life expectancy and literacy rates show that larger GDP per person is associated with
0 longer life expectancy and higher levels of illiteracy.
0 shorter life expectancy and higher levels of illiteracy.
1 longer life expectancy and lower levels of illiteracy.
0 shorter life expectancy and lower levels of illiteracy.

Microeconomics is the study of
0 the government and its role in the economy.
1 how households and firms make decisions, and how they interact in markets.
0 economy-wide topics such as inflation, unemployment and economic growth.
0 economics as if you were looking at the economy with a telescope to get the big picture.

GDP can measures both an economy’s total income and total expenditure because they are
0 always equal because rules in accounting always make things equal.
0 equal only when all goods and services produced are sold.
0 equal because only households purchase goods and services.
1 always equal since every transaction has both a buyer and a seller.

Which of the following represents GDP?
0 C + I + G
0 G + I + NX
0 I + C + NX
1 C + I + G + NX

Which of the following would be counted in the calculation of GDP?
0 the sale of a rare coin to a coin collector
1 homes that are rebuilt after being completely destroyed by a hurricane
0 the sale of a 1966 Ford Fairmont.
0 the sale of cocaine in the black market.

Aaron and Adam, who are both full-time students, have each been doing work on their own cars. Then Adam decides to hire Aaron to do his oil changes, and in turn, Aaron hires Adam to keep his car clean. As a result of this change, GDP
1 rises.
0 falls.
0 is unaffected because the same work is being done as before.
0 is unaffected because Adam and Aaron are full-time students.

The largest component of GDP is
0 net exports.
1 consumption.
0 government purchases.
0 investment.

If the value of intermediate goods were used to calculate GDP instead of final goods, then GDP would be
1 over-estimated, because of double counting.
0 under-estimated because of all the goods and services missed in the calculations.
0 too difficult to measure because of all the goods and services produced in the economy each year.
0 the same, since it doesn’t matter whether intermediate goods or final goods are used in the calculations.

Jim buys a new Mustang in August 1999 and then sells it to John in June 2001. As a result,
0 the value of the car will be included in 2001 GDP only, since that was the year of the last sale.
0 1999 GDP will include the value of the car, and 2001 GDP will include the value of the car minus depreciation.
1 1999 GDP will include the value of the car, but 2001 GDP will not.
0 both 1999 GDP and 2001 GDP will include the value of the car since it was sold in both years.

Which two of the following are considered measures of income for an economy?
1 gross national product and net national product
0 net national profits and personal income
0 gross national product and net national investment
0 disposable personal income and personal profits

Personal income is defined as
0 after-tax proprietors’ income.
1 the total income earned by a nation’s permanent residents.
0 the income that households and non-corporate businesses receive.
0 the total income earned by a nation’s residents minus depreciation.

Retained earnings are the part of income that
0 households retain after paying taxes.
0 business retain after paying taxes.
0 corporations pay to their owners in the form of dividends.
1 corporations do not pay to their owners in the form of dividends.

If the government reports that “GDP increased at an annual rate of 4.0 percent for the fourth quarter of 2000,” then GDP increased by 
0 1.0 percent during 2000.
0 16.0 percent during 2000.
0 4.0 percent during the fourth quarter of 2000.
1 1.0 percent during the fourth quarter of 2000.

If you buy a carton of chocolate chip cookie dough ice cream in your favorite grocery store
1 both GDP and consumption spending will be higher.
0 GDP will be higher, but consumption spending will be unchanged.
0 GDP will be unchanged, but consumption spending will be higher.
0 since your spending on the ice cream became the store’s income, GDP would not change.

Net exports will be positive when
0 imports are larger than exports.
1 exports are larger than imports.
0 imports are equal to exports.
0 GDP increases.

Transfer payments are 
0 paychecks which are automatically deposited in bank accounts.
0 on-line bill payment services offered by many large banks.
0 moving expenses when a worker is transferred by an employer to a new location.
1 government spending that does not reflect payment for currently produced goods or services.

If Hallmark builds a plant in Mexico, the production from that plant would be 
1 included in U.S. GNP but not GDP.
0 included in U.S. GDP but not GNP.
0 included in both U.S. GDP and GNP.
0 not included in either U.S. GDP or GNP but only in Mexico’s production.

If a construction company in Japan purchases a U.S. built bulldozer from Caterpillar, U.S. GDP
0 is the same but U.S. GNP increases.
1 increases since exports are included in GDP.
0 is unaffected since exports are not included in GDP.
0 decreases since the bulldozer could have been purchased by a U.S. company.

In 1998, U.S. GDP was
0 $850 billion.
0 $1,367 billion.
0 $5,808 billion.
1 $8,511 billion.

Real GDP 
0 evaluates current production at current prices.
1 evaluates current production at prices in some base year.
0 is not a valid measure of the economy’s performance.
0 is a measure of the value of goods only, but not services.


GDP is a good but not perfect measure of economic well-being because it leaves out each of the following EXCEPT
0 leisure.
0 volunteer work.
1 medical services.
0 the quality of the environment.

If nominal GDP is $10 trillion and the GDP deflator is 125, real GDP is
0 $6 trillion.
1 $8 trillion.
0 $10 trillion.
0 $12.5 trillion.

If we want to know the amount of expenditures for an average individual in a country, we should look at
0 real GDP.
0 nominal GDP.
1 GDP per person.
0 current GDP.

International GDP data show that
1 a nation’s GDP is closely associated with its citizens’ standard of living.
0 there is no relationship between GDP and the economic well-being of citizens.
0 poor nations actually might enjoy a higher standard of living than do rich nations.
0 there are few real differences in living standards around the world, in spite of the large differences in GDP among nations.

It is especially difficult to measure GDP in Russia because
0 no consistent national income accounting standards exist.
0 the statisticians believe that producers are exaggerating the size of output.
1 a large part of the economy is underground and hidden from the statisticians.
0 only government officials are allowed access to statistics on the economy.

When the consumer price index rises, a typical family
0 can spend fewer dollars to maintain the same standard of living.
0 finds that its standard of living is not affected.
1 has to spend more dollars to maintain the same standard of living.
0 None of the above answers is necessarily correct.

The inflation rate is defined as the
0 cost of inflation. 
0 cost of borrowing. 
0 percentage change in real GDP from the previous period.
1 percentage change in the price level from the previous period.

The CPI is a measure of the overall cost of 
0 producer inputs.
0 personal imports.
1 goods and services bought by a typical consumer.
0 goods and services produced in the economy. 

The CPI is computed using all goods and services
0 produced in the economy. 
0 used to produce other goods. 
0 that typical producers buy.
1 that typical consumers buy. 

In computing the CPI, the base year is the 
0 year against which this years price index is compared to find the inflation rate during the year. 
1 benchmark against which other years are compared. 
0 current year.
0 year with the lowest prices.

For any given year, the CPI is the price of the basket of goods and services in the
1 given year divided by the price of the basket in the base year, then multiplied by 100.
0 base year divided by the price of the basket in the base year, then divided by 100.
0 base year divided by the price of the basket in the given year, then divided by 100.
0 base year divided by the price of the basket in the given year, then multiplied by 100. 

Categories of U.S. consumer spending used in the CPI, ranked from largest to smallest are:
0 food and beverages, housing, and medical care.
0 food and beverages, medical care, and housing.
1 housing, food and beverages, and medical care.
0 housing, medical care, and food and beverages.

Substitution causes the increase in the cost of living from one year to the next to be
0 neither overstated or understated by the CPI because the CPI is based on the price of all goods.
0 overstated by the CPI because the basket of goods used to compute the CPI changes from year to year and so does not take into account the fact that as prices rise people purchase more of the goods they like less. 
0 understated by the CPI because the CPI changes from year to year and so does not take into account the fact that people substitute higher quality goods for lower quality ones as income increases. 
1 overstated by the CPI because the CPI is based on a fixed basket of goods that does not reflect increases in the purchases of goods that become relatively cheap.

Unmeasured quality change is a problem in the CPI because
0 if the quality of a good deteriorates, the purchasing power of a dollar increases even if the price of the good remains the same. 
0 the Bureau of Labor Statistics does not attempt to account for any quality changes that affect the standard of living. 
1 if the quality of a good improves, the purchasing power of a dollar increases even if the price of the good remains the same.
0 Both a and b are correct.

Which of the following statements best represents economists’ beliefs about the bias in the CPI as a measure of the cost of living? 
0 Economists agree on the severity of the CPI bias, but there is still debate on what to do about it.
1 Economists debate both the severity of the CPI bias and what to do about it.
0 Economists agree that the bias in the CPI is a very serious problem. 
0 Economists agree that the bias in the CPI is not a serious problem. 

Most, but not all, soccer balls used in the United States are imported from other nations. If the price of soccer balls increases, the GDP deflator will
0 increase, but the consumer price index will not increase.
1 increase less than will the consumer price index.
0 increase more than will the consumer price index. 
0 not increase, but the consumer price index will increase. 

An Egyptian company produces sweaters in the United States and exports all of them to Lithuania. Other things the same, if the price of these sweaters increases, the GDP deflator
1 increases and the CPI is unchanged. 
0 and the CPI are unchanged.
0 and the CPI both increase.
0 is unchanged and the CPI increases.

The basket of goods in the consumer price index changes
1 occasionally, while the basket of goods in the GDP deflator changes each time it is computed.
0 each time it is computed, while the basket of goods in the GDP deflator changes occasionally.
0 occasionally, as does the basket of goods in the GDP deflator.
0 each time it is computed, as does the basket of goods in the GDP deflator.

What is the purpose of measuring the overall level of prices in the economy? 
0 to allow consumers to know what kinds of prices to expect in the future
0 to allow the measurement of GDP 
1 to allow comparison between dollar figures from different points in time
0 All of the above are correct.

Babe Ruth’s 1931 salary was $80,000. The price index for 1931 is 15.2 and the price index for 1999 is 166. Ruth’s 1931 salary was equivalent to a 1999 salary of about
0 $8,700.
0 $87,000. 
1 $870,000. 
0 $8,700,000.

Craig is offered a $120,000 per year job in Los Angeles, and a $90,000 per year job in Akron. The CPI for Los Angeles is 160 and the CPI for Akron is 120. What is the Los Angeles job’s purchasing power in “Akron dollars”?
0 $160,000
0 $120,000
1 $90,000
0 $65,000

A COLA automatically raises the wage rate when
0 real GDP increases. 
0 the labor force increases.
0 taxes increase.
1 the consumer price index increases. 

The nominal interest rate is
0 the interest rate paid or charged by a bank. 
0 the interest rate as usually reported without a correction for the effects of inflation. 
1 both a and b above.
0 None of the above is correct.

Which of the following is the most accurate statement about the relationship between the nominal interest rate and the real interest rate? 
1 The real interest rate is the nominal interest rate minus the rate of inflation.
0 The real interest rate is the nominal interest rate divided by the price level.
0 The real interest rate is the nominal interest rate times the price level.
0 The real interest rate is the nominal interest rate times the expected price level divided by the current price level.

If the nominal interest rate is 8% and rate of inflation is 2%, the real interest rate is
0 16%. 
0 10%. 
1 6%. 
0 4%.

The nominal interest rate tells you
0 how fast the purchasing power of your bank account rises over time.
1 how fast the number of dollars in your bank account rises over time.
0 the number of dollars in your bank account.
0 the purchasing power of your bank account.

The real interest rate tells you
0 the number of dollars in your bank account.
0 the purchasing power of your bank account.
0 how fast the number of dollars in your bank account rises over time.
1 how fast the purchasing power of your bank account rises over time.

Which of the following is the most accurate statement about nominal and real interest rates?
1 Nominal and real interest rates often do not move together.
0 Nominal and real interest rates always move together.
0 Nominal and real interest rates never move together.
0 Nominal and real interest rates are identical.

Samantha deposits $1,000 in a saving account that pays an annual interest rate of 4%. Over the course of a year the inflation rate is 1%. At the end of the year Samantha has 
1 $40 more in her account, and her purchasing power has increased $30.
0 $30 more in her account and her purchasing power has increased $50.
0 $50 more in her account, and her purchasing power has increased $30.
0 $40 more in her account, and her purchasing power has increased $40.

In the late 1970s, nominal interest rates were high and inflation rates were very high. As a result, real interest rates were
0 very high.
0 moderately high.
0 low, but never negative.
1 low, and in some years they were negative.





Suppose the CPI in 1990 is 125. The CPI in 1999 is 155. What is the rate of inflation over the period? 
1 24 percent
0 25 percent
0 30 percent
0 52 percent

Which of the following has the greatest weight in the CPI?
0 food and beverages
1 housing
0 medical care
0 All of the above have equal weights in the CPI.

The consumer price index is based on 
0 100,000s of prices.
1 10,000s of prices.
0 1,000s of prices.
0 100s of prices.

Consider the following two sentences. The producer price index measures the cost of a basket of goods and services purchased by firms. Changes in the producer price index are thought to be useful in predicting consumer prices.
1 Both sentences are true.
0 Only the first sentence is true.
0 Only the second sentence is true.
0 Neither sentence is true.

Which of the following is true considering substitution bias?
0 When prices change from one year to the next, they do not all change proportionately.
0 Substitution bias tends to make the CPI overstate the cost of living from one year to the next.
0 When the price of a good rises, its weight in the consumer price index will be higher than its weight in the basket of goods people actually buy.
1 All of the above are true.

Consider the following two sentences. The creation of new goods makes each dollar more valuable. Yet because the CPI is based on a fixed basket of goods and services, it does not reflect this decrease in the cost of living.
1 Both sentences are true.
0 Only the first sentence is true.
0 Only the second sentence is true.
0 Neither sentence is true.

Which of the following is correct?
0 The CPI makes no adjustment for quality changes.
1 Research by the Bureau of Labor Statistics shows that over the last 18 years the elderly have experienced more rapid increases in the cost-of-living than the general population.
0 Although there are problems measuring the cost-of-living accurately, there is no reason to believe that on net the CPI either overstates or understates the true inflation rate.
0 All of the above are correct.

If the price of apples increases more than the price of other goods, the weight of the apples in the CPI
0 increases.
0 decreases.
0 stays the same, but should increase to accurately reflect the change in the cost-of-living.
1 stays the same, but should decrease to accurately reflect the change in the cost-of-living. 

Suppose that the price of French wine imported to the US increases, other things the same this
0 increases both the CPI and the GDP in the United States.
1 increases the CPI but does not change the GDP deflator in the U.S.
0 increases the GDP deflator, but does not change the CPI in the U.S.
0 changes neither the CPI nor the GDP deflator in the U.S.

If the price of oil decreases, the CPI
1 decreases more than the GDP deflator decreases.
0 decreases less than the GDP deflator decreases.
0 decreases, but the GDP deflator does not change.
0 does not change, but the GDP deflator decreases.

Which of the following is correct?
0 Both the CPI and GDP deflator use fixed weights.
0 Neither the CPI nor GDP deflator use fixed weights.
1 The CPI, but not the GDP deflator uses fixed weights.
0 The GDP deflator, but not the CPI uses fixed weights.

The inflation rate computed from the CPI is
0 always somewhat greater than that computed from the GDP deflator.
0 always somewhat less than that computed from the GDP deflator.
0 sometimes greater and sometimes less, but generally moves in the opposite direction as the rate computed from the GDP deflator.
1 sometimes greater and sometimes less, but generally moves with the rate computed from the GDP deflator.

In the late 1970s 
1 both the GDP deflator and CPI showed high rates of inflation; in the 1990s both showed low inflation rates.
0 both the GDP deflator and CPI showed low rates of inflation; in the 1990s both showed high inflation rates.
0 and the 1990s both the GDP deflator and CPI showed high rates of inflation.
0 and the 1990s both the GDP deflator and CPI showed low rates of inflation.

In 1949 Sycamore, Illinois built a hospital for about $500,000. In 1987 the county restored the courthouse for about $2.4 million. A price index for nonresidential construction was 14 in 1949, 92 in 1987, and 114.5 in 2000. According to these numbers the hospital cost about
0 $3.6 million in 2000 dollars, which is less than the cost of the courthouse restoration in 2000 dollars.
0 $3.6 million in 2000 dollars, which is more than the cost of the courthouse restoration in 2000 dollars.
0 $4.1 million in 2000 dollars, which is less than the cost of the courthouse restoration in 2000 dollars.
1 $4.1 million in 2000 dollars, which is more than the cost of the courthouse restoration in 2000 dollars.

Your grandparents tell you that in 1960 they paid $0.35 for admission to a movie. The price index in 1960 was 30. The price index in today is 171. What is the price your grandparents paid in today’s dollars? 
0 $1.05
1 $1.99
0 $3.01
0 $5.98

In 1970 Professor Fellswoop made $12,000, in 1980 he earned $24,000, in 1990 he earned $36,000. If the CPI was 40 in 1970, 60 in 1980, 100 in 1990 in terms of 1999 dollars, Professor Fellswoop’s salary was highest in 
0 1970, and lowest in 1980.
0 1990, and lowest in 1980.
1 1980, and lowest in 1970.
0 1990, and lowest in 1970.

Indexation refers to 
0 a process of adjusting the nominal interest rate so that it is equal to the real interest rate.
1 using a law or contract to automatically correct a dollar amount for the effects of inflation.
0 using a price index to deflate dollar values.
0 an adjustment made by the Bureau of Labor Statistics to the CPI so that the index is in line with the GDP deflator.

Mavis Corporation has an agreement with its workers to completely index the wage of their employees to inflation in the CPI. Mavis currently pays its production line workers $7.50 an hour and is scheduled to index their wages today. If the CPI is currently about 130 and was 120 a year ago Mavis should increase the hourly wages of its workers by about
0 7.5 cents 
0 10 cents
0 58 cents
1 62.5 cents

Suppose that the real interest rate is 3% and the inflation rate is 1%.
0 The dollar value of savings increases at 3%, and the value of savings in goods increases at 1%.
0 The dollar value of savings increases at 1%, and the value of savings in goods increases at 2%.
0 The dollar value of savings increases at 2%, and the value of savings in goods increases at 3%.
1 The dollar value of savings increases at 4%, and the value of savings in goods increases at 3%.

Sluggo puts money in the bank and earns a 5% nominal interest rate, if the inflation rate is 3%, in one year Sluggo will have
0 3% more money that will purchase 2% more goods.
0 3% more money that will purchase 8% more goods.
1 5% more money that will purchase 2% more goods.
0 5% more money that will purchase 8% more goods.

In Japan in 2000 nominal interest rates were 1.5% and the inflation rate was –.5%. The real interest rate was
0 –2%.
0 –1%.
0 1%.
1 2%.

A nation’s standard of living is measured by its
0 real GDP.
1 real GDP per person.
0 nominal GDP.
0 nominal GDP per person.

Over the past century in the United States, average income as measured by real GDP per person has grown about
0 4 percent per year, which implies a doubling about every 20 years.
0 3 percent per year, which implies a doubling about every 25 years.
1 2 percent per year, which implies a doubling about every 35 years.
0 1 percent per year, which implies a doubling about every 65 years.

In the length of one generation, which of the following countries has gone from being among the poorest countries in the world to being among the richest?
0 Chad
0 Ethiopia
0 Ghana
1 Singapore

In comparison to other countries, Japan had a high growth rate over the last 100 years. Japan’s average annual growth rate of real GDP per person was a bit less than 
0 0.5 percent.
0 1.0 percent.
0 2.0 percent
1 3.0 percent.

Compounding refers to the
0 geometric smoothing of productivity data.
1 accumulation of a growth rate over a period of time.
0 increase in a growth rate over a period of time.
0 adjustment made to GDP meant to take out the effects of inflation.

When Ben Franklin died he left $5,000 to be invested for a period of 200 years to benefit medical students and scientific research. According to the “rule of 70,” how often would this money have doubled if it grew 7 percent per year every year?
1 about every 10 years
0 about every 7 years
0 about every 5 years
0 about every 3.5 years

According to the rule of 70, if some variable grows at a rate of g percent per year, then that variable doubles in approximately
1 70/g years.
0 70g years.
0 70/2g years.
0 2g/70 years.

Both Elmo and Anna work eight hours a day. Elmo can produce four baskets of goods per hour while Anna can produce three baskets of the same goods per hour. It follows that Elmo’s
0 productivity is greater than Anna’s.
0 output is greater than Anna’s.
0 standard of living is higher than Anna’s.
1 All of the above are correct.

Which of the following would be considered physical capital?
0 paper used to make cardboard for boxes of chocolate
0 the skills and knowledge of a film director
1 boats owned by a shrimp company
0 All of the above are correct.

Which of the following is human capital?
0 a company’s cafeteria
1 employees’ knowledge of the production process
0 the exercise equipment in a company’s gym
0 All of the above are correct.

In a market economy, scarcity of resources is reflected in
0 supply only.
0 demand only.
1 prices.
0 the quantity traded.

Your company discovers a better way to produce DVDs, but how you do this is not apparent from the DVDs themselves. Your knowledge of how to more efficiently produce DVDs is
0 common technological knowledge.
0 common, but not technological knowledge.
1 proprietary technological knowledge.
0 proprietary, but not technological knowledge.

If there are constant returns to scale, the production function can be written as 
0 xY = 2xAF(L, K, H, N).
0 Y/L = A F(xL, xK, xH, xN).
0 L = AF(Y, K, H, N).
1 Y/L = A F( 1, K/L, H/L, N/L).

Which of the following would increase productivity? 
0 an increase in the amount of equipment per-worker
0 an increase in the knowledge and skills of workers
0 the discovery of new raw materials
1 All of the above are correct.

Across countries, investment and growth rates are
0 unrelated.
0 negatively related.
0 negatively related for rich countries, but positively related for poor countries.
1 positively related.

If there are diminishing returns to capital, 
0 capital produces fewer goods as it ages.
0 increases in the capital stock eventually decrease output.
0 the smaller the capital stock, the less an increase in the capital stock increases output.
1 the larger the capital stock, the less an increase in the capital stock increases output.

The logic behind the catch-up effect is that
0 workers in countries with low income will work harder than workers in countries with high incomes.
1 new capital adds more to production in a country that doesn’t have much capital than in a country that already has much capital.
0 the capital stock in rich countries deteriorates more rapidly than the capital stock in poor countries.
0 None of the above is correct.

In the 1800s, Europeans purchased stock in American companies that used the funds to build railroads and factories. The Europeans made
1 foreign portfolio investments.
0 indirect domestic investments.
0 bilateral domestic investments.
0 foreign indirect investments.

Which of the following is generally an opportunity cost of investment in human capital?
1 forgone wages at present 
0 increased earning potential
0 future job security
0 All of the above are correct.

Generally, the main cause of famine is
0 a shortage of food.
0 excessive population.
1 an inadequate distribution of food.
0 None of the above is correct.

Outward-oriented policies
1 have led to high growth rates for the countries that pursued them.
0 prevent countries from taking advantage of gains from trade.
0 seem good in theory, but have not increased economic growth in practice.
0 None of the above is correct.

A large and sudden increase in the number of workers is likely to 
0 raise real GDP per person, but decrease real GDP.
0 decrease both real GDP and real GDP per person.
0 raise both real GDP and real GDP per person.
1 raise real GDP, but decrease real GDP per person.

The primary reason that U.S. living standards are higher today than they were a century ago is that 
0 human capital has increased.
0 physical capital per worker has increased.
1 technological knowledge has increased.
0 more productive natural resources have been discovered.

From 1973 to 1998, U.S. productivity growth was slower than from 1959 to 1973. Which of the following is correct?
0 This continues a downward trend as output growth was higher in periods before 1959.
1 It appears that this may be attributed to a slowdown in technological progress.
0 This slowdown is unique to the United States.
0 All of the above are correct.

Typically, countries in Africa
1 have high tax rates.
0 have laws and geography that make international trade easy.	
0 had low but positive growth of real GDP per person between 1978 and 1994.
0 All of the above are correct.

In the last 100 years U.S. per-capita real GDP grew about 
0 2% per year, so that it is about two times as high.
1 2% per year, so that it is about eight times as high.
0 4% per year, so that it is about two times as high.
0 4% per year, so that it is about eight times as high.

Per-capita real GDP in China is about equal to per-capita real GDP in the United States in
0 1870, and 1/2 that in the United States today.
1 1870, and 1/8 that in the United States today.
0 1920, and 1/2 that in the United States today.
0 1920, and 1/8 that in the United States today.

Of countries listed in the text, the per-capita real GDP growth rates over the last 100 years ranged from about 
0 0%-5%.
1 1%-3%.
0 2%-5%.
0 3%-6%.

Suppose an economy that was roughly the size of Australia had a population of 19 million and real GDP of about 380,000 million U.S. dollars in 1998. Suppose further that in 1999 population was about 19.5 million and real GDP was about 401,500 million dollars. What are the approximate growth rates of real GDP and of real GDP per-capita?
0 5.7%, 5.3%
1 5.7%, 3%
0 3%, 5.7%
0 5.3%, 3%

Which of the following is correct?
0 If a country has a per-capita real GDP growth rate of 7%, its per-capita real GDP will double about every 14 years.
0 The current level of per-capita real GDP in the United States is about $19,450.
1 Although 100 years ago the United Kingdom had greater per-capita real GDP than the United States and Canada, it now has lower per-capita real GDP than both of them.
0 All of the above are correct.

Productivity is the
0 growth rate of real GDP.
1 average amount a worker produces per hour.
0 level of real GDP.
0 None of the above is correct.

Suppose that factory output rose from 50,000 units to 55,000 units while labor hours rose from 1100 to 1200. Which of the following is true? 
0 Labor productivity remained unchanged.
1 Labor productivity increased slightly.
0 Labor productivity decreased slightly.
0 Labor productivity increased sharply.

The productivity of U.S. workers is higher than that of workers in many countries that have less capital. Which of the following arguments concerning these facts is logically consistent?
0 This contradicts the idea of diminishing marginal product. If U.S. workers have more capital, they should have lower productivity.
0 Productivity in the United States is higher because the United States has more workers than those countries having low productivity.
1 The United States could have greater productivity because its workers have both more human capital and physical capital per worker.
0 None of the above is logically consistent.

Engineering students learn long-established methods for constructing bridges, in and of itself this learning increases
1 human capital.
0 physical capital.
0 technological knowledge.
0 None of the above is correct.

If there are constant returns to scale then
1 a doubling of all inputs doubles real GDP.
0 technological progress does not affect per-capita real GDP.
0 doubling labor would leave per-capita real GDP unchanged.
0 an increase in capital per worker would leave per-capita real GDP unchanged.

Which of the following is incorrect?
0 Bulldozers are an example of physical capital.
0 Students can be viewed as workers who have the important job of producing human capital that will be used in future production.
1 A forest is a non-renewable resource.
0 Technological progress may reduce our dependence on nonrenewable resources.

Human capital is
0 the number of workers in the economy.
0 the number of workers divided by the population.
0 the amount of physical capital per worker.
1 society’s understanding of the best way to produce output.

Consider the following two sentences. The wealth of some countries derives primarily from the natural resources they own. However, countries with few natural resources can be highly productive.
1 Both sentences are true.
0 Only the first sentence is true.
0 Only the second sentence is true.
0 Neither sentence is true.

Once adjusted for inflation the price of most natural resources 
0 rose because of increasing demand from a growing population.
0 rose because their supply is declining.
0 were stable or falling because of government price controls.
1 None of the above is correct.

In the long run a higher savings rate leads to
0 a higher level of per-capita income.
0 a higher level of productivity.
0 an increase in the growth rate of income.
1 A and B, but not C.

Consider the following two sentences. According to the data, countries with higher investment relative to GDP, tend to have higher growth rates of real GDP per person. This relation is not perfect though, because an increase in the physical capital stock increases output per person more in a country with much capital than in a similar country with less capital.
0 Both sentences are true.
0 Both sentences are false.
1 Only the first sentence is true.
0 Only the second sentence is true.

The catch-up effect is the
1 tendency for countries that start off poor to grow more rapidly than countries that start off rich.
0 property whereby the benefits of an extra unit of an input declines as the quantity of the input increases.
0 tendency for the growth rate of the capital stock of a country to match its population growth rate.
0 property whereby the benefits of different inputs move toward each other over time.

Which of the following is incorrect?
0 Controlling for other variables such as the percentage of GDP devoted to investment, poor countries tend to grow faster than rich countries.
0 The growth that arises from capital accumulation is not a free lunch.
0 Countries such as Singapore and Japan, that devoted a large share of GDP to investment from 1960-1991 tended to have higher growth rates over this period.
1 The United States and Korea devoted similar shares of real GDP to investment from 1960-1991, but the United States had a higher growth rate.

Which would increase the capital stock of El Salvador and provide returns to U.S. investors?
0 U.S. foreign direct investment in El Salvador.
0 U.S. foreign portfolio investment in El Salvador.
1 Both of the above are correct.
0 Neither of the above is correct.

U.S. foreign direct investment
0 raises both U.S. GDP and U.S. GNP.
0 raises neither U.S. GDP nor U.S. GNP.
0 raises U.S. GDP, but not U.S. GNP.
1 raises U.S. GNP, but not U.S. GDP.

Which of the following is NOT correct?
0 Many economists would advise governments in less-developed economies to implement policies that encourage investment from abroad.
0 Lowering population growth rates can increase per-capita real GDP.
0 Some economists argue that education is particularly important because human capital has positive externalities.
1 In the long run, increases in the savings rate lead to increases in real GDP growth.

Which of the following statements is correct? 
1 In general, a given level of investment in a poor country will lead to greater economic growth than the same level of investment in a rich country.
0 If a nation invests more, its economic growth rate will be permanently higher.
0 A nation must have abundant natural resources if it is to experience rapid economic growth.
0 Increased economic growth through increased investment does not have an opportunity cost.

Generally speaking from society’s viewpoint, the returns to research and development undertaken by firms
1 is a public good.
0 is a private good.
0 should never be supported by government.
0 will never occur if a system of patents is not put into place.

Suppose a German-owned automobile company opens a new car plant in Wayne, Nebraska.
1 This foreign direct investment increases U.S. real GDP more than it increases U.S. real GNP.
0 This foreign direct investment increases U.S. real GNP more than it increases U.S. real GDP.
0 This foreign portfolio investment increases U.S. real GDP more than it increases U.S. real GNP.
0 The foreign portfolio investment increases U.S. real GNP more than it increases U.S. real GDP.

Which of the following can increase real GDP per person?
0 a decrease in population growth
0 foreign investment from abroad
0 policies to encourage international trade
1 All of the above are correct.

When a country saves a smaller portion of its GDP, it will have
0 more investment, and so have more capital and higher productivity.
0 more investment, and so have less capital and lower productivity.
0 less investment, and so have more capital and higher productivity.
1 less investment, and so have less capital and lower productivity.

What are the two basic categories of financial institutions?
0 the foreign exchange markets and the stock markets
1 the financial markets and financial intermediaries
0 the market for loanable funds and the market for capital
0 the lending market and the deposit market

Which of the following is not a nonsensical headline?
0 British perpetuities about to mature.
0 Disney issues new bonds with term of $1,000 each.
1 Government bonds currently pay less interest than corporate bonds.
0 Standard and Poor’s judges new junk bond to have very low credit risk.

A certificate of indebtedness that specifies the obligations of the borrower to the holder is called a 
0 stock.
0 mutual fund.
1 bond.
0 All of the above are correct.

Rudolph has the choice of two bonds, one that pays 5 percent interest and the other that pays 10 percent interest. Which of the following is most likely?
0 The 10 percent bond is less risky than the 5 percent bond
0 The 10 percent bond has a shorter term than the 5 percent bond
0 The 10 percent bond is a U.S. government bond, and the 5 percent bond is a junk bond
1 The 10 percent bond is a corporate bond, and the 5 percent bond is a municipal bond

People who buy stock in a corporation such as Maytag become
0 creditors of Maytag, so the benefits of holding the stock depend on Maytag’s profits.
0 creditors of Maytag, but the benefits of holding the stock do not depend on Maytag’s profits.	
1 part owners of Maytag, so the benefits of holding the stock depend on Maytag’s profits.
0 part owners of Maytag, but the benefits of holding the stock do not depend on Maytag’s profits.

Stock indexes are
0 reports in the newspapers that report on the price of the stock and earnings of individual corporations over time.
1 the average of a group of stock prices.
0 measures of the risk relative to the profitability of corporations.
0 measures of the price of a stock relative to its risk.

A corporation has a price of $25, a dividend of $.50, and retained earnings of $.30 per share. The dividend yield on this stock is
0 3.2 percent.
1 2 percent.
0 1.7 percent.
0 1 percent.

A mutual fund 
0 is a financial market where small firms sell stocks and bonds to raise funds. 
0 is money set aside by local governments to lend to small firms who want to invest in projects that are mutually beneficial to the firm and community.
0 sells stocks and bonds on behalf of small and not-very-well-known firms who would otherwise have to pay high interest to obtain credit.
1 sells shares to the public and uses the proceeds to buy a selection of various types of stocks, bonds, or both stocks and bonds.

Which of the following equations represents national saving in a closed economy?
0 Y – I – G – NX
1 Y – C – G
0 Y – I – C
0 G + C – Y

In a closed economy, national saving equals
0 income minus private consumption.
0 private saving minus public saving.
1 investment.
0 All of the above are correct.

Suppose that in a closed economy GDP is equal to 9,000, taxes are equal to 1,000, Consumption equals 6,000, and government expenditures equal 2,000. What are private saving and public saving?
1 2000 and –1000
0 2000 and 1000
0 1000 and –1000
0 1000 and 2000

A budget surplus is created when the government 
0 sells more bonds than it buys back.
0 spends more than it receives in tax revenue.
1 receives more tax revenue than it spends.
0 None of the above is correct.

The source of the demand for loanable funds
0 and the supply of loanable funds is saving.
0 and the supply of loanable funds is investment.
0 is saving and the source of the supply of loanable funds is investment.
1 is investment and the source of the supply of loanable funds is saving.

The supply of loanable funds slopes
0 downward because an increase in the interest rate induces people to save less.
0 downward because an increase in the interest rate induces people to invest less.
1 upward because an increase in the interest rate induces people to save more.
0 upward because an increase in the interest rate induces people to invest more.

A lower interest rate induces people to
0 save less, so the demand for loanable funds slopes upward.
0 save less, so the demand for loanable funds slopes downward.
0 invest more, so the demand for loanable funds slopes upward.
1 invest more, so the demand for loanable funds slopes downward.

If the current market interest rate for loanable funds is below the equilibrium level, then the quantity of loanable funds
0 demanded exceeds the quantity of loanable funds supplied and the interest rate will fall.
1 demanded exceeds the quantity of loanable funds supplied and the interest rate will rise.
0 supplied exceeds the quantity of loanable funds demanded and the interest rate will fall.
0 supplied exceeds the quantity of loanable funds demanded and the interest rate will rise.

If the inflation rate is 3 percent and the real interest rate is 9 percent, then the nominal interest rate is 
1 12 percent.
0 6 percent.
0 3 percent.
0 1/3 percent.

Promises of future payments have the largest present value when interest rates are
0 high and the time until the future payment is received is long.
0 high and the time until the future payment is received is short.
0 low and the time until the future payment is received is long.
1 low and the time until the future payment is received is short.

What would happen in the market for loanable funds if the government were to decrease the tax on interest income?
1 The supply of loanable funds would shift right.
0 The supply of loanable funds would shift left.
0 The demand for loanable funds would shift right.
0 The demand for loanable funds would shift left.

If Congress raised the tax on interest income, investment
0 and saving would increase.
1 and saving would decrease.
0 would increase and saving would decrease.
0 would decrease and saving would increase.

Which of the following is incorrect?
1 Taxes on interest income do not substantially decrease future payments from current saving.
0 American families save a smaller fraction of their incomes than their counterparts in many other countries such as Germany and Japan.
0 Saving is an important long-run determinant of a nation’s standard of living.
0 A change in the tax law that encouraged greater saving would reduce interest rates.

Suppose that Congress were to institute an investment tax credit. What would happen in the market for loanable funds?
0 The supply of loanable funds would shift left.
0 The supply of loanable funds would shift right.
0 The demand for loanable funds would shift left.
1 The demand for loanable funds would shift right.

An increase in the budget deficit shifts the
0 demand for loanable funds left.
0 demand for loanable funds right.
1 supply of loanable funds left.
0 supply of loanable funds right.

Which of the following beliefs would make someone less likely to oppose government deficits?
0 The return on private investment is higher than the return on public investment.
0 Taxes considerably distort private decision making.
1 The demand for loanable funds curve is very steep.
0 All of the above would make someone less likely to oppose government deficits.

If Microsoft sells a bond they are 
1 borrowing directly from the public.
0 borrowing indirectly from the public.
0 lending directly to the public.
0 lending indirectly to the public.

You buy a bond issued by Dole Corporation. Which of the following feature(s) of this bond refers to its term?
0 It pays an interest rate of 12%.
1 It matures in five years.
0 It is selling for $8,750.
0 All of the above are correct.

Which of the following is correct?
0 Differences in credit risk mean that corporate bonds tend to have higher interest rates than U.S. government bonds.
0 Differences in tax treatment mean that U.S. government bonds tend to have a higher interest rate than municipal bonds.
1 Both of the above are correct.
0 Neither of the above is correct.

Papa Mario’s Pizza Company sells stock.
1 They are using equity financing and the return shareholders earn depends on how profitable the company is.
0 They are using debt financing and the return shareholders earn depends on how profitable the company is.
0 They are using equity financing and the return shareholders earn is fixed.
0 They are using debt financing and the return shareholders earn is fixed.

Worldwide Delivery Service Corporation develops a way to speed up their deliveries and reduce their costs. We expect the
1 demand for existing shares of this stock to rise causing its price to rise.
0 demand for existing shares of this stock to rise causing its price to fall.
0 supply of the existing shares of this stock to rise causing its price to rise.
0 supply of the existing shares of this stock to fall casing its price to fall.

Suppose Sarah Lee Corporation stock has a P/E ratio of 8. This P/E ratio is relatively
0 high, indicating buyers may expect earnings to rise.
0 high indicating buyers may expect earnings to fall.
0 low, indicating buyers may expect earnings to rise.
1 low, indicating buyers may expect earnings to fall.

Retained earnings are
0 paid out as dividends.
0 the amount of revenues a firm receives for the sale of its products minus its costs of production as measured by its accountants.
0 are the single most important piece of information about a stock.
1 None of the above is correct.

Which of the following is correct?
1 Smaller local firms borrow relatively more from banks than larger well-known corporations do.
0 Banks charge borrowers a slightly lower interest rate than they pay to depositors.
0 Stocks, bonds, and deposits are all similar in that each provides a medium of exchange.
0 None of the above is correct.

Other things the same, an increase in taxes necessarily means
0 the government has a surplus.
1 public savings increases.
0 private savings increases.
0 None of the above is correct.

In a closed economy national savings minus the government surplus is equal to
0 investment.
0 public saving.
1 private saving.
0 real GDP minus consumption minus government expenditures.


If people wanted to borrow more for mortgages, perhaps because of changes in tax laws that make home ownership more desirable, then the
1 demand for loanable funds shifts right, making the interest rate rise.
0 demand for loanable funds shifts right, making the interest rate fall.
0 supply of loanable funds shifts right, making the interest rate rise.
0 supply of loanable funds shifts right, making the interest rate fall.

Other things the same, a fall in the interest rate induces borrowers to borrow
0 less and savers to save less.
1 more and savers to save less.
0 less and savers to save more.
0 more and savers to save more.

If the demand for loanable funds shifts right, the interest rate
1 and lending increase.
0 and lending decrease.
0 increases and lending decreases.
0 decreases and lending increases.

An increase in the supply of loanable funds will (other things constant): 
0 increase the equilibrium interest rate and decrease investment.
0 increase the equilibrium interest rate and increase investment.
1 decrease the equilibrium interest rate and increase investment.
0 decrease the equilibrium interest rate and decrease investment.

Oksana put money in the bank one year ago at an interest rate of 5%; during that time prices rose by 2%. The dollar value of Oksana’s account has increased 
0 7% and the real value increased 5%.
0 7% and the real value increased 2%.
0 5% and the real value increased 7%.
1 5% and the real value increased 3%.

Your boss promises to pay you a retirement bonus of $40,000 when you retire six years from today. If the interest rate is 5%, the present value of this payment is 
0 $40,000/(6 / 1.05).
1 $40,000/(1.05)6.
0 $40,0000/(6)1.05.
0 $40,000 	 (1.05)6.

Roth Individual Retirement Accounts allow people to save a limited amount of money without paying taxes on the interest when funds are withdrawn. Government programs like these should increase the
0 demand for loanable funds and lower the interest rate.
0 demand for loanable funds and raise the interest rate.
1 supply of loanable funds and lower the interest rate.
0 supply of loanable funds and raise the interest rate.

During the Presidencies of Kennedy and Reagan tax changes were made that reduced taxes on investment. Government programs like these should increase the
0 demand for loanable funds and lower the interest rate.
1 demand for loanable funds and raise the interest rate.
0 supply of loanable funds and lower the interest rate.
0 supply of loanable funds and raise the interest rate.

If the government wanted to decrease interest rates and increase investment it could 
0 raise the government deficit. 
1 reduce taxes on interest income. 
0 provide investment tax credits. 
0 None of the above is correct. 

Which of the following will shift the demand for loanable funds? 
0 a decrease in the market rate of interest
0 a law passed by Congress granting special tax breaks for savers
1 a law passed by Congress granting special tax breaks for borrowers
0 an increase in the market rate of interest

Replacing the income tax with a consumption tax would 
0 increase interest rates and saving. 
0 decrease interest rates and saving. 
0 increase interest rates and decrease saving. 
1 decrease interest rates and increase saving. 

Between 1814 and 1829 the national debt of the U.S. government fell from about $128 million to about $50 million. The model of the market for loanable funds suggests that this reduction of the debt should have
0 increased the interest rate and investment. 
0 increased the interest rate and decreased investment. 
1 decreased the interest rate and increased investment. 
0 decreased the interest rate and investment. 

	An increase in the budget deficit is represented by shifting the
0 demand for loanable funds right.
0 demand for loanable funds left.
0 supply of loanable funds right.
1 supply of loanable funds left.

Suppose the government reduced the tax rate on interest income and used a current budget surplus to finance this tax cut.
0 The reduction in tax rates and the reduction in the surplus would both shift the supply of loanable funds right.
1 The reduction in tax rates would shift the supply of loanable funds right. The reduction in the surplus would shift the supply of loanable funds left.
0 The reduction in tax rates would shift the supply of loanable funds left. The reduction in the surplus would shift the supply of loanable funds right.
0 None of the above is correct.

The natural rate of unemployment is
0 zero percent.
0 the rate associated with the highest possible level of GDP.
0 created primarily by short-run fluctuations in real GDP.
1 the amount of unemployment that the economy normally experiences.

Unemployment data is collected
0 from firms and unemployment insurance claims.
1 through a regular survey of about 60,000 households.
0 from payroll data received for tax purposes.
0 None of the above is correct.

Which of the following people is counted as unemployed according to official statistics?
1 Nancy, who is on temporary layoff
0 Gary, who has retired and is not looking for work
0 Brian, a full-time student who is not looking for work
0 All of the above are correct.

Who would be included in the labor force?
0 Holly, an unpaid homemaker
1 Dave, who does not have a job, but is looking for work	
0 Bruce, a full-time student not looking for work
0 None of the above are included in the labor force.

The BLS recently reported that there were 45.38 million college graduates over age 16. Of this number 36.08 million were in the labor force and 35.48 were employed. What was the labor-force participation rate and the unemployment rate for this group?
0 about 78 percent and 1.3 percent
1 about 79.5 percent and 1.7 percent
0 about 92 percent and 1.3 percent
0 about 98 percent and 1.7 percent

Kay loses her job and decides to sit around home for a few months. Ceteris paribus, the unemployment rate
1 increases, and the labor-force participation rate decreases.
0 increases, and the labor-force participation rate is unaffected.
0 increases, and the labor-force participation rate increases.
0 is unaffected, and the labor-force participation rate increases.

Which of the following is correct?
0 Teenagers have lower labor-force participation rates and lower unemployment rates than do adults.
1 Teenagers have lower labor-force participation rates and higher unemployment rates than do adults.	
0 Teenagers have higher labor-force participation rates and higher unemployment rates than do adults.
0 Teenagers have higher labor-force participation rates and lower unemployment rates than do adults.

Just after World War II, the labor-force participation rate of women was
0 about 3/5 and currently is 1/2.
0 about 1/2 and currently is about 3/5.
1 about 1/3 and currently is about 3/5.
0 about 1/4 and currently is about 2/3.

Suppose that some people report themselves as unemployed when, in fact, they are working in the underground economy. If these persons were counted as employed, 
0 both the unemployment rate and labor-force participation rate would be higher.
0 the unemployment rate would be higher and the labor-force participation rate would be unchanged.
1 the unemployment rate would be lower and the labor-force participation rate would be unchanged.
0 both the unemployment rate and labor-force participation rate would be lower.

Christine is looking for work as a financial analyst. Although her prospects are good, she hasn’t yet taken a job. Pam is looking for work in a furniture factory, but there aren’t many furniture companies looking for workers and every time she shows up for an interview, there are many more people than openings. 
1 Christine is frictionally unemployed and Pam is structurally unemployed.
0 Christine is structurally unemployed and Pam is frictionally unemployed.
0 Christine and Pam are both frictionally unemployed.
0 Christine and Pam are both structurally unemployed.

People who are unemployed because of job search are best classified as
0 cyclically unemployed.
0 discouraged workers.
1 frictionally unemployed.
0 structurally unemployed.

Sectoral shifts in the economy
0 create structural unemployment.
0 immediately reduce unemployment.
0 on net leave unemployment unchanged.
1 increase unemployment due to job search.

Unemployment insurance
0 reduces job search unemployment.
0 decreases the natural rate of unemployment.
1 increases frictional unemployment.
0 All of the above are correct.

A typical American worker covered by unemployment insurance receives 
0 100 percent of their former wages for 26 weeks.
0 75 percent of their former wages for 50 weeks.
1 50 percent of their former wages for 26 weeks.
0 25 percent of their former wages for 50 weeks.

An increase in the world price of oil creates a sectoral shift that probably
0 decreases unemployment, and the decrease would be greater in a country with unemployment insurance than in one without.
0 decreases unemployment, but the decrease would be smaller in a country with unemployment insurance than in one without.
1 increases unemployment, and the increase would be greater in a country with unemployment insurance than in one without.
0 increases unemployment, but the increase would be smaller in a country with unemployment insurance than in one without.

Minimum wage laws
1 probably reduce teenage employment.
0 are probably the major cause of natural unemployment.
0 probably most adversely affect skilled workers.
0 All of the above are correct.

Between the 1940s and today, union membership
0 fell from about 1/2 to 1/3 of the labor force.
1 fell from about 1/3 to 1/6 of the labor force.
0 rose from about 1/6 to 1/3 of the labor force.
0 rose from about 1/3 to 1/2 of the labor force.

When a union bargains successfully with an employer, 
1 the quantity of labor supplied increases but the quantity of labor demanded decreases.
0 the quantity of labor supplied increases but the quantity of labor demanded increases. 
0 both the quantity of labor supplied and the quantity of labor demanded increase.
0 both the quantity of labor supplied and the quantity of labor demanded decrease.

When unions raise wages in one sector of the economy, the supply of labor in other sectors of the economy
0 decreases, raising wages in industries that are not unionized.
0 decreases, reducing wages in industries that are not unionized.
0 increases, raising wages in industries that are not unionized.
1 increases, reducing wages in industries that are not unionized. 

Right-to-work laws
0 prevent employers from hiring permanent replacements for workers who are on strike.
0 allows employers to replace workers who are on strike.
0 guarantee workers the right to form unions.
1 give workers in a unionized firm the right to choose whether or not to join the union.

Angela is the newly appointed CEO of a company that manufactures computer chips on an assembly line. Her staff has told her that given productivity numbers, they suspect some workers may be shirking. According to efficiency wage theory, what should she do?
1 Pay all workers more than the equilibrium wage rate.
0 Reward those who shirk with higher wages.
0 Pay below the equilibrium wage rate to make up for the loss from shirking.
0 Make sure that workers are getting paid exactly the equilibrium wage rate.

Efficiency wages reduce
0 the average quality of job applicants.
0 labor-force participation rates.
0 the natural rate of unemployment.
1 the incentive to shirk.

An efficient wage designed to ensure that quality workers are hired is designed principally to reduce a problem created by 
1 adverse selection, but it also increases unemployment.
0 adverse selection, but it also decreases unemployment.
0 moral hazard, but it also increases unemployment.
0 moral hazard, but it also decreases unemployment.

Which of the following explanations of the natural rate of unemployment is most important for the U.S. economy?
0 job search
0 minimum wage laws
0 unions
1 Economists have not determined the answer to this question.

Henry Ford paid his workers $5.00 per day to 
0 meet union demands.
0 prevent his workers from unionizing.
0 protest minimum wage laws.
1 increase worker productivity.

Which of the following is correct?
0 Some degree of unemployment is inevitable.
0 Other things the same, an increase in the number of people who are unemployed decreases real GDP. 
0 Cyclical unemployment is inversely related to short-run economic fluctuations.
1 All of the above are correct. 

According to the BLS, a homemaker is 
0 employed. 
0 unemployed. 
1 not in the labor force. 
0 Both b and c are correct.

The labor force equals the
0 adult population minus the number of people unemployed. 
1 number of people employed plus the number of people unemployed. 
0 number of people who are employed. 
0 number of people who are unemployed. 

The unemployment rate is computed as the number of unemployed times 100
1 divided by the labor force.
0 divided by the number of people employed.
0 divided by the adult population. 
0 times the participation rate.

The total population (age 16 and over) of Pageland is 48 million. Of this total, 4 million are unemployed and 36 million currently hold jobs. What are the rates of unemployment and labor force participation of Pageland? 
0 The rate of unemployment is 11 percent, and the rate of labor force participation is 83 percent.
0 The rate of unemployment is 10 percent, and the rate of labor force participation is 75 percent.
1 The rate of unemployment is 10 percent, and the rate of labor force participation is 83 percent.
0 The rate of unemployment is 11 percent, and the rate of labor force participation is 90 percent.

According to recent statistics from Spain, the unemployment rate was about 16.97% and the number of people employed was about 13.5 million. About how many people were unemployed?
0 1.82 million
0 2.29 million
1 2.76 million
0 The answer cannot be determined from the information provided.


Since 1950, the participation rate in the United States
0 increased for both men and women.
0 decreased for both men and women.
0 increased for men, but decreased for women.
1 decreased for men, but increased for women.

Studies have found that most
0 unemployment at a given point in time is short term.
0 spells of unemployment are long.
0 spells of unemployment are caused by discouraged workers.
1 unemployment at any given point in time is long term.

Consider the following sentences. Most spells of unemployment are short. Most unemployment observed at any given time is long-term.
1 Both sentences are true. 
0 Both sentences are false. 
0 Only the first sentence is true.
0 Only the second sentence is true.

Consider the following sentences. Frictional unemployment results because it takes time for workers to search for the jobs that best suit their taste and skills. Structural unemployment results because the number of jobs available in some labor markets is insufficient to provide the jobs for everyone who wants one. 
1 Both sentences are true. 
0 Both sentences are false. 
0 Only the first sentence is true. 
0 Only the second sentence is true. 

Unemployment insurance 
0 reduces search effort and lowers unemployment.
1 reduces search efforts and raises unemployment. 
0 increases search effort and raises unemployment. 
0 increases search effort and decreases unemployment.

Higher unemployment insurance benefits tend to increase the level of unemployment because the higher benefits
0 reduce the opportunity cost of job search and hence increase the search time.
1 increase the opportunity cost of job search and hence increase the search time.
0 reduce the opportunity cost of job search and hence decrease the search time.
0 increase the opportunity cost of job search and hence decrease the search time.

Which of the following would increase frictional unemployment?
0 a reduction in unemployment insurance 
1 increases in the world price of oil 
0 increased information about job openings and worker ability 
0 All the above are correct.

Increasing the minimum wage would increase
0 both frictional and structural unemployment.
0 frictional unemployment, but not structural unemployment. 
1 structural unemployment, but not frictional unemployment.
0 neither frictional nor structural unemployment. 

An increase in the minimum wage would
0 increase both the quantity demanded and the quantity supplied of labor. 
0 decrease both the quantity demanded and the quantity supplied of labor. 
0 increase the quantity demanded of labor and decrease the quantity supplied of labor. 
1 increase the quantity supplied of labor and decrease the quantity demanded of labor. 

If an industry becomes unionized, 
0 both employment and wages in that industry tend to rise. 
1 wages in that industry tend to rise, while employment in that industry tends to fall. 
0 wages in that industry tend to fall, while employment in that industry tends to rise.
0 both employment and wages in that industry tend to fall.

In Sweden and Denmark
0 about 1/3 of the workers belong to unions, which is less than in the United States.
0 about 1/3 of the workers belong to unions, which is more than in the United States.
0 about 3/4 of the workers belong to unions, which is less than in the United States.
1 about 3/4 of the workers belong to unions, which is more than in the United States.

Efficiency wages
1 increase both productivity and unemployment.
0 decrease both productivity and unemployment.
0 increase productivity and decrease unemployment.
0 decrease productivity and increase unemployment.

Tom Crown operates a company that produces paintings for motels. Tom decides that if he pays his workers more that his profits will increase. Which of the following is a likely and logical explanation for his decision?
0 By paying higher wages, he will be able to charge more for the paintings his workers produce.
0 By paying higher wages, incompetent workers are less likely to apply.
1 By paying higher wages, workers are less likely to shirk.
0 All of the above are correct.

The theory of efficiency wages implies that if it became easier to accurately evaluate the workers’ abilities, wages
0 and unemployment would rise.
0 would rise and unemployment would fall.
0 would fall and unemployment would rise.
1 and unemployment would fall.

Anything that makes the efficiency wage rise relative to the market-clearing wage will
0 increase both the quantity demanded and the quantity of labor supplied.
0 decrease both the quantity demanded and the quantity of labor supplied.
0 increase the quantity demanded and decrease the quantity of labor supplied.
1 decrease the quantity demanded and increase the quantity of labor supplied.

Among experienced professors the ones with the least skills are most likely to be searching for jobs and as a result schools are likely to be skeptical of applications from all experienced professors. If workers have much say in who gets hired, they may find it in their best interest to avoid suggesting the hire of workers that may be superior to them.
0 Both examples illustrate adverse selection.
0 Both examples illustrate moral hazard.
1 The first example illustrates adverse selection, the second illustrates moral hazard.
0 The first example illustrates moral hazard, the second illustrates adverse selection.

Which of the following would reduce the natural rate of unemployment?
1 The Internet provides more readily available information about available jobs.
0 Congress increases the minimum wage.
0 Union membership increases.
0 All of the above are correct.

Which of the following laws would increase the natural rate of unemployment?
0 Congress abolishes the minimum wage.
1 Congress passes laws that make it harder to find out about job candidates’ past job history.
0 Congress passes a law that makes all states adopt right-to-work laws.
0 All of the above are correct.

Barter
0 is more efficient than money.
0 makes trading easier than money.
0 allows greater specialization than money.
1 None of the above is correct.

Which of the following best illustrates the unit of account function of money?
1 You list prices for candy sold on your Web site, sweet-treats.com, in dollars.
0 You pay for tickets to a WNBA game with dollars.
0 You keep $10 in your backpack for emergencies.
0 None of the above is correct.

U.S. currency is currently 
0 commodity money with no intrinsic value.
1 fiat money with no intrinsic value.
0 commodity money with intrinsic value.
0 fiat money with intrinsic value.

Since the U.S. government has decreed that U.S. currency is legal tender,
0 people may not legally make trades with anything else.
1 people are more likely to accept the dollar as a medium of exchange.
0 the government must hold enough gold to redeem all currency.
0 All of the above are correct.

M1 includes
0 savings deposits.
0 money market deposit accounts.
1 currency.
0 All of the above are correct.

Credit cards are
1 a method of deferring payment.
0 used as a medium of exchange.
0 part of the M2 money supply.
0 equivalent to debit cards.

Which of the following might explain why the United States has so much currency per person?
1 Currency may be a preferable store of wealth for criminals.
0 U.S. citizens are holding a lot of foreign currency.
0 People use credit and debit cards more frequently.
0 All of the above help explain the abundance of currency.

Which Federal Reserve Bank president is always a voting member of the FOMC?
0 Boston
1 New York
0 Chicago
0 All of the above are correct.

The Federal Open-market Committee is made up of
1 5 of the 12 presidents of the Federal Reserve Regional banks, and the 7 members of the Board of Governors.
0 the 12 presidents of the Federal Reserve Regional banks, and the Chair of the Board of Governors.
0 the 12 presidents of the Federal Reserve Regional banks, and the 7 members of the Board of Governors.
0 7 of the 12 presidents of the Federal Reserve Regional banks, and the 5 members of the Board of Governors.

The Fed can influence unemployment in 
1 the short run, but not the long run.
0 the short and long run.
0 the long run, but not the short run.
0 neither the short nor long run.

On a bank’s T-account,
0 deposits are assets, reserves are liabilities.
1 reserves are assets, deposits are liabilities.
0 both deposits and reserves are assets.
0 both deposits and reserves are liabilities.

If the reserve ratio is 5 percent and a bank receives a new deposit of $500, this bank
0 must increase its required reserves by $500.
0 will initially see its total reserves increase by $25.
1 will be able to make a new loan of $475.
0 All of the above are correct.

If the reserve requirement is 10 percent, the Last Bank of Hope
1 is holding excess reserves of $1,000.
0 is in a position to make a new loan of $2000.
0 has required reserves of $2,000.
0 has less reserves than required.

If the Last Bank of Hope is holding only the amount of reserves required, the reserve requirement is
0 100 percent.
0 80 percent.
1 20 percent.
0 12.5 percent.

If the reserve ratio is 25 percent, the money multiplier is
0 2.
1 4.
0 5.
0 8.

If the reserve ratio is 15 percent, an additional $2,000 of reserves will increase the money supply by
0 $1,500.
0 $3,000.
0 $13,150.
1 $13,333.

Which list contains only actions that decrease the money supply?
0 lower the discount rate, make open-market purchases
0 lower the discount rate, make open-market sales
0 raise the discount rate, make open-market purchases
1 raise the discount rate, make open-market sales

To increase the money supply, the Fed could
0 sell government bonds.
1 decrease the discount rate.
0 increase the reserve requirement.
0 None of the above is correct.

In a fractional reserve banking system, an increase in reserve requirements 
0 increases both the money multiplier and the money supply.
0 increases the money multiplier, but decreases the money supply.
1 decreases both the money multiplier and the money supply.
0 decreases the money multiplier, but increases the money supply.

When the Fed increases the discount rate, banks will borrow 
0 less, banks will lend more, and the money supply will decrease.
1 less, banks will lend less, and the money supply will decrease.
0 more, banks will lend more, and the money supply will increase.
0 more, banks will lend less, and the money supply will decrease.

The interest rate the Fed charges on loans it makes to banks is called the
1 discount rate.
0 federal funds rate.
0 prime rate.
0 FOMC rate.

During the stock market crash of October 1987, the Fed
0 nearly created a financial panic by not acting as a lender of last resort.
0 nearly created a financial panic by raising the discount rate.
1 prevented a financial panic by providing liquidity to the financial system.
0 prevented a financial panic by raising reserve requirements.

If the reserve ratio is 10 percent, and banks do not hold excess reserves, when the Fed purchases $10 million of government bonds, bank reserves 
0 decrease by $10 million and the money supply eventually decreases by $100 million.
0 decrease by $10 million and the money supply eventually increases by $100 million.
0 increase by $10 million and the money supply eventually decreases by $100 million.
1 increase by $10 million and the money supply eventually increases by $100 million.

If banks choose to hold more excess reserves,
0 required reserves in the banking system increase.
0 the money multiplier will increase.
0 the discount rate will increase.
1 the money supply falls.

The Fed can directly protect a bank during a bank run by
0 increasing reserve requirements.
0 selling government bonds to the bank.
1 lending reserves to the bank.
0 doing any of the above.

Giving up a dollar bill to purchase an ice cream cone best illustrates money’s function as a
0 store of wealth.
0 unit of account.
1 medium of exchange.
0 standard of value. 

Which of the following provides a store of value? 
0 U.S. currency 
0 stocks in Microsoft Corporation 
0 bonds issued by Mrs. Paul’s Corporation 
1 All the above are correct. 

Of the following assets which is the most liquid? 
1 stocks in Intel Corporation
0 a painting by van Gogh 
0 a used car
0 fine jewelry 

Which of the following types of currency has intrinsic value? 
1 commodity money
0 fiat money 
0 both commodity money and fiat money 
0 neither commodity money nor fiat money 

Which of the following is not contained in M1? 
0 currency
0 demand deposits 
1 savings deposits
0 traveler’s checks

M2 is 
0 smaller and less liquid than M1. 
0 smaller but more liquid than M1. 
1 larger but less liquid than M1. 
0 larger than and more liquid than M1. 

Credit cards are a
0 store of value. 
1 method of deferring payments. 
0 medium of exchange included in both M1 and M2.
0 All of the above are correct. 

Which of the following pairs correctly list a function of the Fed and the part of the Fed directly responsible for the function.
0 income tax policy—Board of Governors
0 conduct open-market operations—The Chair of the Board of Governors
0 lender of last resort—New York Federal Reserve Bank
1 check clearing—regional Federal Reserve Banks

Which part of the Fed meets about every six weeks to discuss the economy and make changes in monetary policy?
0 the Board of Governors
1 the FOMC
0 the regional Federal Reserve Banks
0 the Central Bank Policy Commission

If the Fed makes open-market purchases it will
1 increase the money supply which will increase the price level. 
0 increase the money supply which will decrease the price level. 
0 decrease the money supply which will increase the price level. 
0 decrease the money supply which will decrease the price level. 

FOMC policy decisions have an important influence on the economy’s
1 rate of inflation in the long run and level of employment in the short run. 
0 rate of inflation and level of employment in the long run. 
0 rate of inflation in the short run and level of employment and long run. 
0 employment in the short run, but have no influence on inflation in either the short or long run. 

The First National Bank of Tinyville has $10,000 of reserves. If it is holding no excess reserves, and the reserve ratio is 10%, its deposits are
0 $90,000.
0 $99,000.
1 $100,000.
0 $110,000.

Which of the following items is a liability to a bank? 
0 loans
0 reserves
1 deposits
0 an interest-bearing asset owned by the bank 

If R is the reserve ratio, which of the following is the correct way to find the money multiplier?
0 1 – R
1 1/R
0 1/(1 – R)
0 (1+R)/R

The higher the reserve requirement ratio the
0 more of each deposit banks may lend out, and the larger the multiplier.
0 more of each deposit banks may lend out, and the smaller the multiplier.
0 less of each deposit banks may lend out, and the larger the multiplier.
1 less of each deposit banks may lend out, and the smaller the multiplier.


The Fed’s most frequently used tool of monetary control is 
1 open-market operations. 
0 changes in reserve requirements. 
0 changes in the discount rate. 
0 bank runs.

In 1991 the Federal Reserve lowered the reserve requirement ratio from 12% to 10%. This should have 
1 increased both the money multiplier and the money supply. 
0 increased both the money multiplier and the money supply. 
0 decreased the money multiplier and increased the money supply. 
0 increased the money multiplier and decreased the money supply. 

Suppose the Federal Reserve System purchases one-hundred thousand dollars of government bonds. If the reserve requirement is 10%, the Fed’s purchase
0 increases the money supply by 90 thousand dollars. 
1 increases the money supply by one million dollars. 
0 decreases the money supply 90 thousand dollars. 
0 decreases the money supply by one million dollars. 

An increase in the discount rate 
0 increases the money supply, while an increase in the reserve ratio decreases the money supply. 
0 or an increase in the reserve ratio increases the money supply. 
1 or an increase in the reserve ratio decreases the money supply. 
0 decreases the money supply, while an increase in the reserve ratio increases the money supply. 

If the Federal Reserve wished to increase the money supply it could make open-market
0 sales or raise the discount rate. 
0 sales or decrease the discount rate. 
0 purchases or increase the discount rate. 
1 purchases or decrease the discount rate. 

Which of the following will increase the money supply, but leave the money multiplier unchanged? 
0 an increase in the discount rate.
0 open-market sales.
0 an increase in the reserve ratio.
1 None of the above is correct.

An increase in the discount rate encourages banks to borrow
0 more from the Fed and increases the money supply. 
1 less from the Fed and reduces the money supply. 
0 more from the Fed and reduces the money supply. 
0 less from the Fed and increases the money supply. 

During World War II people chose to hold relatively more currency and relatively fewer checking deposits. This should have 
0 increased the money multiplier and the money supply. 
0 increased the money multiplier and decreased the money supply. 
0 decreased the money multiplier and increased the money supply. 
1 decreased the money multiplier and decreased the money supply. 

In the nineteenth century when there were bank runs, banks would make relatively fewer loans and hold relatively more excess reserves. This should have 
0 increased both the money multiplier and the money supply. 
1 decreased both the money multiplier and the money supply. 
0 increased the money multiplier and decreased the money supply. 
0 decreased the multiplier and increased the money supply. 

Which of the following concerning U.S. inflation is false?
1 Low inflation was viewed as a triumph of President Carter’s economic policy.
0 There were long periods in the nineteenth century during which prices fell.
0 The U.S. public has viewed inflation of even 7 percent as a major economic problem.
0 U.S. inflation has varied over time, but international data shows even more variation.

There was hyperinflation during 
0 1880 to 1896 in the United States.
1 post World War I Germany.
0 the 1970s in the United States.
0 All of the above are correct.

When the price level rises, the number of dollars needed to buy a representative basket of goods
0 decreases, so the value of money rises.
0 decreases, so the value of money falls.
0 increases, so the value of money rises.
1 increases, so the value of money falls.

When the money market is drawn with the value of money on the vertical axis, the money demand curve slopes
0 upward, because at higher prices people want to hold less money.
0 upward, because open-market purchases make more money available.
1 downward, because at higher prices people want to hold more money.
0 downward, because at higher prices people want to hold less money.

When the money market is drawn with the value of money on the vertical axis, the value of money increases if
1 money demand shifts right or money supply shifts left.
0 money demand shifts left or money supply shifts right.
0 either money demand or money supply shifts right.
0 either money demand or money supply shifts left.

When the money market is drawn with the value of money on the vertical axis, the price level increases if
0 money demand shifts right or money supply shifts left.
1 money demand shifts left or money supply shifts right.
0 either money demand or money supply shifts right.
0 either money demand or money supply shifts left.

A decrease in the money supply creates an excess
0 demand for money that is eliminated by rising prices.
1 demand for money that is eliminated by falling prices.
0 supply of money that is eliminated by rising prices.
0 supply of money that is eliminated by falling prices.

Hubert spends $60 on a portable CD player.
0 Both the $60 and the CD player are real variables.
0 Both the $60 and the CD player are nominal variables.
1 The $60 is a nominal variable and the CD player is a real variable.
0 The $60 is a real variable and the CD player is a real variable.

Steve lowers the hourly wage he pays his employees $1. The employees figure that, even accounting for the decrease, they can purchase more goods with what they earn in an hour than they could a year ago. It follows that 
0 the workers’ real and nominal wages have risen.
1 the workers’ real wage rose and their nominal wage fell.
0 the workers’ real wage fell and their nominal wage rose.
0 both the real and nominal wages fell.

According to the classical dichotomy, which of the following is influenced by monetary factors?
1 nominal interest rates
0 real GDP
0 employment
0 All of the above are correct.

According to the classical dichotomy, when the money supply doubles, which of the following also double?
0 the price level
0 nominal wages
0 nominal GDP
1 All of the above are correct.

Monetary neutrality implies that an increase in the quantity of money will increase
1 the price level.
0 employment.
0 the percentage of their income people save.
0 None of the above is correct.

Velocity is computed as 
0 (P 	 M)/Y.
0 (Y 	 M)/P.
1 (P 	 Y)/M.	
0 (Y 	 M)/V.

The equation of exchange alone implies that an increase in M could result in
0 an increase in the price level.
0 an increase in real GDP.
0 an increase in nominal GDP.
1 All of the above are correct.

If velocity and output were nearly constant,
0 the inflation rate would be much higher than the money supply growth rate.
0 the inflation rate would be much lower than the money supply growth rate.
1 the inflation rate would be about the same as the money supply growth rate.
0 Any of the above could be correct, more information is needed.

The inflation tax
1 is an alternative to income taxes and government borrowing.
0 taxes those who hold the least amount of money most.
0 is the cost to the government of printing currency.
0 All of the above are correct.

If the money supply growth rate permanently increased from 10 percent to 20 percent we would expect that inflation and nominal interest rates would both increase
0 by more than 10 percentage points.
1 by 10 percentage points.
0 but by less than 10 percentage points.
0 None of the above is correct.

An increase in the money supply growth rate increases 
0 inflation, nominal interest rates, and real interest rates.
0 inflation and real interest rates, but does not change nominal interest rates.
1 inflation and nominal interest rates, but does not change real interest rates.
0 nominal and real interest rates, but does not change inflation.

Shoeleather costs refer to
0 the cost of more frequent price changes induced by higher inflation.
1 resources used to maintain lower money holdings when inflation is high.
0 the distortion in resource allocation created by distortions in relative prices due to inflation.
0 the distortion in incentives, created by inflation, by taxes that do not adjust for inflation.

Menu costs refer to 
0 the distortion in incentives created by inflation when taxes do not adjust for inflation.
1 the cost of more frequent price changes induced by higher inflation.
0 resources used by people to maintain lower money holdings when inflation is high.
0 the distortion in resource allocation created by distortions in relative prices due to inflation.

You buy stock and its price rises more than the price level; before taxes you made a nominal
1 and real gain, and you pay taxes on the nominal gain.
0 and real gain, and you pay taxes only on the real gain.
0 gain and real loss, yet you pay taxes on the nominal gain.
0 gain and real loss, the real loss means you pay less tax.

Given a nominal interest rate of 20 percent, in which case would you earn the highest after-tax real interest rate?
1 Inflation is 5 percent; the tax rate is 20 percent.
0 Inflation is 4 percent; the tax rate is 30 percent.
0 Inflation is 3 percent; the tax rate is 40 percent.
0 The after-tax real interest rate is the same for all of the above.

Which of the following inflation costs matter even when actual and expected inflation are the same?
0 menu costs
0 inflation induced tax distortions
0 relative price variability
1 All of the above are correct.

In 1898, prospectors on the Klondike River discovered gold. This discovery caused an unexpected price level 
0 decrease, which helped creditors at the expense of debtors.
0 decrease, which helped debtors at the expense of creditors.
0 increase, which helped creditors at the expense of debtors.
1 increase, which helped debtors at the expense of creditors.

In order to maintain stable prices, the central bank must
1 tightly control the money supply.
0 keep unemployment low.
0 sell indexed bonds.
0 All of the above are correct.

Which of the following concerning U.S. inflation is incorrect? 
0 Over the last 60 years the average inflation rate was about 5%. 
0 In the nineteenth century there were periods of deflation. 
0 Inflation was relatively low in the 1990s. 
1 Farmers were especially hurt by the high inflation of the late 1800s.

The quantity theory of money is helpful for explaining 
0 hyperinflation only. 
0 moderate inflation only. 
1 Both moderate inflation and hyperinflation. 
0 Neither moderate inflation nor hyperinflation. 

When the price level falls, 1/P
1 increases and the value of money increases. 
0 increases and the value of money decreases. 
0 decreases and the value of money increases. 
0 decreases and the value of money decreases. 

The money supply curve shifts right if 
0 the Fed sells bonds in the open market. 
0 1/P rises. 
1 the Fed buys bonds in the open market. 
0 Both a and b are correct.

As the price level increases, people want to hold a
1 larger quantity of money as shown by moving along the money demand curve. 
0 larger quantity of money as shown by shifting the money demand curve. 
0 smaller quantity of money as shown by moving along the money demand curve. 
0 smaller quantity of money as shown by shifting money demand curve. 

The quantity of money supplied is balanced with the quantity of money demanded by adjustments in the
0 interest rate in both the long run and the short run.
0 price level in both the long run and the short run.
0 interest rate in the long run and adjustments in the price level in the short run.
1 price level in the long run and adjustments in the interest rate in the long run.

A decrease in the equilibrium quality of money and an increase in the equilibrium value of money could be created by 
0 an increase in money demand. 
0 an increase in money supply. 
1 a decrease in money supply. 
0 a decrease in money demand.

Suppose the economy is initially in monetary equilibrium. The Federal Reserve then increases the money supply. As a result the quantity of money demanded will
0 exceed the quantity of money supplied, and the price level will fall.
0 exceed the quantity of money supplied, and the price level will increase.
0 be less than the quantity of money supplied, and the price level will fall.
1 be less than the quantity of money supplied, and the price level will increase. 

Which of the following both cause the price level to decrease? 
0 an increase in money supply and an increase in money demand. 
1 an increase in money supply and a decrease in money demand. 
0 a decrease in money supply and an increase in money demand. 
0 a decrease in money supply and a decrease in money demand. 

Which of the following is an example of a real variable? 
0 the income of your economics professor
0 the dollar value of the economy’s output
1 the quantity of rice produced by a rice farmer
0 the profits earned by Ford Motor Company in 2000 

If there is monetary neutrality which of the following change when the money supply changes? 
0 real interest rates
1 the price level
0 employment
0 building and modernizing of factories. 

Today most economists accept Hume’s conclusion of monetary neutrality as an accurate description of the economy in
0 both the long run and the short run.
0 neither the short run nor the long run. 
0 the short run only.
1 the long run only.

The economy of Empe produces only compact discs. In a recent year they produced 6,000 compact discs at a price of $12 each. They had a money supply of $6,000. For that year the velocity of money in Empe 
0 was 1/12.
0 was 1.
1 was 12.
0 cannot be determined from the information given.

According to the quantity equation, other things the same, the price level would increase if either the money supply
1 or the velocity of money increased. 
0 or the velocity of money decreased. 
0 increased or the velocity of money decreased. 
0 decreased or the velocity of money increased. 

Consider the following two assumptions. The velocity of money is stable over time. Factory supplies and production technology primarily determine the economy’s output of goods and services. 
1 Both assumptions are important to the quantity theory of money. 
0 Neither assumption is important to the quantity theory of money. 
0 Only the first assumption is important to the quantity theory of money. 
0 Only the second assumption is important to the quantity theory of money. 

Data on hyperinflation indicates, 
0 that money supply growth was much greater than inflation. 
1 that money supply growth was about the same as inflation. 
0 that money supply growth was much less than inflation. 
0 no close relationship between money supply growth and inflation. 

An analysis of countries experiencing rapid rates of inflation indicates that inflation is generally: 
0 caused by strong labor unions.
0 the result of restrictive macropolicy, which pushes up interest rates.
0 caused by the impulse buying of consumers, who continue to purchase the same goods even when prices go up.
1 the result of allowing the money supply to grow too rapidly.

The inflation tax refers to the tendency
0 of real interest rates to rise when money supply growth rises. 
1 for the value of dollars people hold to fall as the government prints more money. 
0 for people to pay more income tax as prices rise. 
0 All of the above are correct. 

According to the Fisher effect, when the rate of money supply growth increases
0 both real and nominal interest rates should increase.
0 both real and nominal interest rates should decrease. 
0 real interest rates should increase and nominal interest rates should be unchanged. 
1 None of the above is correct. 

Inflation was higher in Argentina in the 1980s than in the 1990s. If the Fisher effect is correct, we would expect to observe that in Argentina
1 nominal interest rates were higher in the 1980s than in the 1990s.
0 nominal interest rates were higher in the 1990s than in the 1980s.
0 real interest rates were higher in the 1980s than in the 1990s.
0 real interest rates were higher in the 1990s than in the 1980s.

If wages and prices both rose by 5%, workers’
0 real wages would rise so they would be better-off.
1 real wages would be unchanged, so they would be neither better-off nor worse-off.
0 nominal wage would fall, so they would be worse-off.
0 None of the above is correct.

Shoeleather costs refer to 
1 resources people use to reduce their money holdings when inflation is high.
0 the tendency of some costs to rise more than others when inflation rises.
0 the costs incurred by people looking for better-paying jobs when inflation rises.
0 All of the above are correct.

Menu costs refer to the costs of 
0 comparing prices.
1 changing prices.
0 comparing alternative investments.
0 All of the above are correct.

If the nominal interest rate is 10%, the inflation rate is 6%, and the tax rate is 20%, what is the after-tax real rate of interest?
0 4%
0 3.2%
0 2.8%
1 2%

If a country suddenly and unexpectedly reduces monetary growth inflation will be unexpectedly
1 low and wealth is redistributed from borrowers to lenders.
0 low and wealth is redistributed from lenders to borrowers.
0 high and wealth is redistributed from lenders to borrowers.
0 None of the above is correct.

Who is worse-off when countries trade?
0 both the exporting and importing county
0 only the exporting country
0 only the importing country
1 neither the exporting nor importing country

International trade is of major importance for understanding
0 the nature of inflation.
0 the basics of the natural unemployment rate.
0 macroeconomics in closed economies.
1 None of the above is correct.

Net exports of a country are the value of goods
0 exported minus the value of goods imported.
0 imported minus the value of goods exported. 
0 and services imported minus the value of goods and services exported.
1 and services exported minus the value of goods and services imported.

Peter, a Canadian citizen, sells several hundred cases of smoked salmon to a restaurant chain in the United States. By itself this sale
0 decreases U.S. net exports and has no effect on Canadian net exports.
1 decreases U.S. net exports and increases Canadian net exports.
0 increases U.S. net exports and has no effect on Canadian net exports.
0 increases U.S. net exports and decreases Canadian net exports.

U.S. imports account for about what percentage of GDP?
0 less than 1 percent
0 about 4 percent
0 about 7 percent
1 over 10 percent

If a resident of the United States buys stock in a Japanese corporation, this is an example of U.S.
1 foreign portfolio investment.
0 foreign direct investment.
0 exports.
0 imports.

Brad, a U.S. resident, builds and operates a boxing gym in Thailand. The purchase represents
0 U.S. foreign direct investment and U.S. domestic investment.
0 U.S. foreign portfolio investment and U.S. domestic investment.
1 investment for Brad and U.S. foreign direct investment.
0 investment for Brad and U.S. foreign portfolio investment.

Paul, a U.S. citizen, opens a textbook company in Brazil. His expenditures
0 decrease U.S. and Brazilian net foreign investment.
0 increase U.S. and Brazilian net foreign investment.
1 increase U.S. net foreign investment, but decrease Brazilian net foreign investment.
0 decrease U.S. net foreign investment, but increase Brazilian net foreign investment.

While making investment decisions, investors 
0 compare the nominal, but not the real, interest rates offered on different bonds.
1 compare the real interest rates offered on different bonds.
0 purchase the highest-priced bond available.
0 All of the above are correct.

Which of the following is correct?
0 In many countries, the government finances a much larger share of investment projects than they used to.
1 Foreign stock markets make up an increasing share of the value of stock worldwide.
0 The U.S. stock market accounts for less than 1/3 of the value of stocks worldwide.
0 None of the above is correct.

Which of the following is true?
0 NX + NFI = Y
0 Y = NFI – NX
1 NFI = NX
0 NFI + I = NX

If a U.S. shirtmaker purchases cotton from Egypt, U.S. net exports
0 decrease, and U.S. net foreign investment increases.
1 decrease, and U.S. net foreign investment decreases.
0 increase, and U.S. net foreign investment increases.
0 increase, and U.S. net foreign investment decreases.

Which of the following is incorrect?
1 The total movement of capital from advanced to developing nations is a large fraction of the world’s total investment.
0 Growing exports of manufactured goods from South to North will lead to a net loss of northern industrial jobs only if they are not matched by growth in exports from North to South.
0 Exports from Third World countries of manufactured goods equal about 1 percent of First World income.
0 Growing exports to the newly industrialized countries have created about as many jobs as growing imports have displaced.

Which of the following equations is correct?
0 S = I + C
1 S = I + NFI
0 S = I – NX
0 All of the above are correct.

After 1980, U.S. Net Foreign Investment fell dramatically, but the U.S. economy did not experience a similar fall in domestic investment. Hence, saving in the United States must 
1 have decreased dramatically.
0 have increased dramatically.
0 have been about unchanged.
0 not necessarily have done any of the above.

If the exchange rate changes from 30 Thai bhat per dollar to 45 Thai bhat per dollar, the dollar has 
0 depreciated and so buys more Thai goods.
0 depreciated and so buys fewer Thai goods.
0 appreciated and so buys fewer Thai goods.
1 appreciated and so buys more Thai goods.

Suppose that a ton of coal costs 1500 British pounds in the UK and $2000 in the United States. If the nominal exchange rate is .75 British pounds per dollar, the real exchange rate is
0 4/3 tons of British coal per ton of U.S. coal.
1 1 ton of British coal per ton of U.S. coal.
0 4/3 tons of U.S. coal per ton of British coal.
0 None of the above are correct.

If the nominal exchange rate e is foreign currency per dollar, the domestic price is P, and the foreign price is P*, the real exchange rate is defined as 
1 e(P/P*).
0 e(P*/P).
0 e + P/P.
0 e – P/P*.

A depreciation of the U.S. real exchange rate induces U.S. consumers to buy
0 fewer domestic goods and fewer foreign goods.
0 fewer domestic goods and more foreign goods.
1 more domestic goods and fewer foreign goods.
0 more domestic goods and more foreign goods.

If the U.S. real exchange rate appreciates relative to the French franc, U.S. exports to France
0 rise, and French exports to the United States fall.
1 fall, and French exports to the United States rise.
0 and French exports to the United States rise.
0 and French exports to the United States fall.

Suppose that the dollar buys more coffee in Kenya than in Brazil. Traders could make a profit by buying coffee in
1 Kenya and selling it in Brazil, which would tend to raise the price of coffee in Kenya.
0 Kenya and selling it in Brazil, which would tend to raise the price of coffee in Brazil.
0 Brazil and selling it in Kenya, which would tend to raise the price of coffee in Brazil.
0 Brazil and selling it in Kenya, which would tend to raise the price of coffee in Kenya.

If P = domestic prices, P* = foreign prices, and e is the exchange rate, which of the following is implied by purchasing-power parity?
0 P = e/P*
1 e = P*/P
0 1 = e/P*
0 None of the above is correct.

When a country’s central bank decreases the money supply, its price level
0 rises and its currency depreciates relative to other currencies in the world.
0 falls and its currency depreciates relative to other currencies in the world.
0 rises and its currency appreciates relative to other currencies in the world.
1 falls and its currency appreciates relative to other currencies in the world.

When a country’s central bank increases the money supply, a unit of money
0 loses value in terms of the domestic goods and services it can buy, but gains value in terms of the foreign currency it can buy.
1 loses value both in terms of the domestic goods and services it can buy and in terms of the foreign currency it can buy.
0 gains value both in terms of the domestic goods and services it can buy and in terms of the foreign currency it can buy.
0 gains value in terms of the domestic goods and services it can buy, but loses value in terms of the foreign currency it can buy. 

On behalf of your firm, you make frequent trips to Liberia. You notice that you always have to pay fewer dollars to get the local currency to have your hair styled than you have to pay for similar styling in the United States. This is 
1 inconsistent with purchasing-power parity, but might be explained by limited opportunities for arbitrage in hair styling across international borders.
0 consistent with purchasing-power parity if prices in Liberia are rising more rapidly than prices in the United States.
0 consistent with purchasing-power parity if prices in Liberia are rising less rapidly than prices in the United States.
0 None of the above is correct.

In 1999 Morocco exported $5.9 billion of goods and services and imported $8.4 billion. Morocco had a trade balance of about
0 $14.3 billion.
0 $2.5 billion.
0 $0.
1 –$2.5 billion.

Which of the following would be consistent with a trade balance of $5 billion?
0 exports and imports each equal $2.5 billion.
1 exports equal $15 billion and imports equal $10 billion.
0 imports equal $12 billion and imports equal $17 billion.
0 None of the above is correct.

A Swiss firm opens a watch factory in the United States. 
1 This is Swiss foreign direct investment and by itself increases Swiss net foreign investment.
0 This is Swiss foreign direct investment and by itself decreases Swiss net foreign investment.
0 This is Swiss foreign portfolio investment and by itself increases Swiss net foreign investment.
0 This is Swiss foreign portfolio investment and by itself decreases Swiss net foreign investment.

A U.S. firm opens a factory that produces camping equipment in Albania, by itself
1 this increases U.S. net foreign investment and decreases Albanian net foreign investment.
0 this decreases U.S. net foreign investment and increases Albanian net foreign investment.
0 increases only U.S. net foreign investment.
0 increases only Albanian net foreign investment.

Suppose that the real return from operating factories in Ghana decreases relative to the real rate of return in the United States. Other things the same,
0 this increases U.S. net foreign investment and decreases Ghanan net foreign investment.
1 this decreases U.S. net foreign investment and increases Ghanan net foreign investment.
0 increases only U.S. net foreign investment.
0 increases only Ghanan net foreign investment.

A U.S. computer maker sells computers to a German firm. The U.S. company uses all of the revenues from this sale to purchase automobiles from German firms. These transactions
0 increase both U.S. net exports and U.S. net foreign investment.
0 decrease both U.S. net exports and U.S. net foreign investment.
0 increase U.S. net exports but do not affect U.S. net foreign investment.
1 None of the above is correct.

Brazil buys railroad engines from a U.S. firm and pays for them with bolivianos (Bolivian currency). By itself this transaction
1 increases both U.S. net exports and U.S. net foreign investment.
0 decreases both U.S. net exports and U.S. net foreign investment.
0 increases U.S. net exports but does not affect U.S. net foreign investment.
0 None of the above is correct.

In which of the following situations must national saving rise?
0 domestic investment increases and net foreign investment decreases.
0 domestic investment decreases and net foreign investment increases.
1 both domestic investment and net foreign investment increase.
0 net exports decrease and domestic investment is unchanged.

The difference between savings in an open and closed economy equals
0 net exports.
0 net foreign investment.
1 Both of the above are correct.
0 None of the above is correct.

Consider the following two actions. 1. Kohl’s, a U.S. department store chain, builds new stores in Sweden. 2. Rudy, a U.S. citizen, buys newly issued bonds from Campmore.com who uses the money to build additional warehouse space in the United States. 
1 Both 1. and 2. increase U.S. savings.
0 Neither 1. nor 2. increase U.S savings.
0 1. increases U.S. savings, but 2. does not.
0 2. increases U.S. savings, but 1. does not.

During the twenty years or so before this text was written the United States had 
0 both positive net exports and net foreign investment.
1 both negative net exports and net foreign investment.
0 positive net exports and negative net foreign investment.
0 negative net exports and positive net foreign investment.

Which of the following is a true statement? 
1 Net foreign investment always equals a nation’s net exports.
0 Net foreign investment equals a nation’s exports plus national saving.
0 National saving equals net foreign investment minus domestic investment.
0 National saving equals domestic investment minus net foreign investment.

If a country has business opportunities that are relatively attractive compared to other countries, we would expect it to have
0 both positive net exports and positive net foreign investment.
1 both negative net exports and negative net foreign investment.
0 positive net exports and negative net foreign investment.
0 negative net exports and positive net foreign investment.

In late 1999 you could purchase about 325 Greek drachma (Greek currency) for a dollar. In late 2000 you could purchase about 400 drachma for a dollar. These exchange rates are given in 
0 real terms, and over this period the dollar appreciated.
0 real terms, and over this period the dollar depreciated.
1 nominal terms, and over this period the dollar appreciated.
0 nominal terms, and over this period the dollar depreciated.

In January 2000 the exchange rate was 5.6 new kwanza (Angolan currency) per dollar. In January 2001 it was 6 new kwanza per dollar.
1 The dollar appreciated and so other things the same was worth more Angolan goods.
0 The dollar appreciated and so other things the same was worth fewer Angolan goods.
0 The dollar depreciated and so other things the same was worth more Angolan goods.
0 The dollar depreciated and so other things the same was worth fewer Angolan goods.

In the United States a three-pound can of coffee costs about $6. Suppose the exchange rate is about 50 Belgian francs per dollar and that a three-pound can of coffee in Belgium costs about 400 francs. What is the real exchange rate?
0 4/3 cans of Belgian coffee per can of U.S. coffee.
0 3/2 cans of Belgian coffee per can of U.S. coffee.
1 3/4 cans of Belgian coffee per can of U.S. coffee.
0 2/3 cans of Belgian coffee per can of U.S. coffee.

Suppose the nominal exchange rate is 100, the domestic price index is 50, and the foreign price index is 10. The real exchange rate is: 
0 1,000.
1 500.
0 100.
0 50.

Suppose that the exchange rate is 50 Bangladesh taka per dollar, that a bushel of rice costs 200 taka in Bangladesh and $3 in the United States. Then the real exchange rate is
0 greater than one and arbitragers could profit by buying rice in the United States and selling it in Bangladesh.
0 greater than one and arbitragers could profit by buying rice in Bangladesh and selling it in the United States.
1 less than one and arbitragers could profit by buying rice in the United States and selling it in Bangladesh.
0 less than one and arbitragers could profit by buying rice in Bangladesh and selling it in the United States.

Which of the following does purchasing-power parity imply?
1 the purchasing power of the dollar is the same in the United States as in foreign countries.
0 the price of domestic goods relative to foreign goods cannot change.
0 the nominal exchange rate is the ratio of U.S. prices to foreign prices.
0 All of the above are correct.

The nominal exchange rate is about 2 Aruban florin per dollar. If a basket of goods in the United States costs $40, how many florins must a basket of goods in Aruba cost for purchasing-power parity to hold?
0 20 florin.
0 40 florin.
1 80 florin.
0 100 florin.

The exchange rate is about 200 Kazakhstan tenge per dollar. According to purchasing power parity this exchange rate would rise if the price level in
0 either the United States or Kazakhstan rose.
0 either the United States or Kazakhstan fell.
0 the United States rose or the price level in Kazakhstan fell.
1 the United States fell or the price level in Kazakhstan rose.

If inflation in other countries is higher than inflation in the United States over the next few months and exchange rates are given in terms of how much foreign currency a dollar buys and how many foreign goods U.S. goods buy, according to purchasing-power parity we should expect to see
0 both the real and nominal exchange rate appreciate.
0 both the real and nominal exchange rate depreciate.
0 only the real exchange rate depreciate.
1 only the nominal exchange rate appreciate.

Suppose the dollar depreciates relative to the British pound. We know that: 
0 prices in the United States are falling.
1 prices in the United States are rising.
0 prices in Great Britain are rising.
0 United States dollars will buy more British pounds.

If exchange rates are given in terms of how much foreign currency a dollar buys and how many foreign goods U.S. goods buy, then if the Fed increased the U.S. money supply other things the same, purchasing-power parity implies
0 both the real and nominal exchange rate depreciate.
0 only the real exchange rate depreciates.
1 only the nominal exchange rate depreciates.
0 None of the above is correct.

Which of the following would be inconsistent with purchasing-power parity?
0 Tom is traveling in Europe; he notices that he will have to give up the same amount of U.S. currency to obtain foreign currency to eat breakfast whether he eats in London or Paris.
1 You observe that the exchange rate is 40 French francs per dollar. Over the next year inflation is higher in France than in the United States and the exchange rate is still 40 French francs per dollar.
0 Both of the above are inconsistent with purchasing-power parity.
0 Neither of the above is inconsistent with purchasing-power parity.

Over the past decade, the United States has 
0 usually been very near to a trade balance.
1 persistently had a trade deficit.
0 persistently had a trade surplus.
0 had trade deficits about as often as trade surpluses.

In an open economy, the market for loanable funds equates national saving with 
0 domestic investment.
0 net foreign investment.
1 the sum of domestic investment and net foreign investment.
0 the supply of foreign currency.

A rise in the real interest rate
0 encourages investment and so increases the quantity of loanable funds supplied.
0 encourages investment and so decreases the quantity of loanable funds demanded.
0 discourages investment and so increases the quantity of loanable funds supplied.
1 discourages investment and so decreases the quantity of loanable funds demanded.

If the interest rate were above the equilibrium level, the 
0 shortage of loanable funds would drive the interest rate downward.
1 surplus of loanable funds would drive the interest rate downward.
0 shortage of loanable funds would drive the interest rate upward.
0 surplus of loanable funds would drive the interest rate upward.


Which of the following is correct?
0 When U.S. net exports are negative, the purchase of capital assets abroad exceeds the sale of capital assets abroad.
0 When U.S. net exports are positive, Americans must be selling foreign assets.
1 The imbalance between exports and imports of goods and services equals the imbalance between the purchase and sale of capital assets abroad.	
0 All of the above are correct.

In the market for foreign currency exchange, the amount of net foreign investment desired at each real interest rate represents the quantity of dollars
1 supplied for the purpose of buying assets abroad.
0 supplied for the purpose of selling assets domestically.
0 demanded for the purpose of buying U.S. net exports of goods and services.
0 demanded for the purpose of importing foreign goods and services.

Net foreign investment = net exports implies that
0 national saving equals domestic investment.
1 the supply of dollars equals the demand for dollars in the foreign-currency exchange market.
0 the supply of loanable funds equals the demand for foreign funds in the open-economy macroeconomic model.
0 All of the above are correct.

An appreciation of the real exchange rate for the dollar
1 decreases the quantity of dollars demanded in the market for foreign-currency exchange.	
0 increases the quantity of dollars demanded in the market for foreign-currency exchange. 
0 shifts the demand for dollars in the market for foreign-currency exchange to the right.
0 shifts the demand for dollars in the market for foreign-currency exchange to the left.

The variable that links the market for loanable funds and the foreign-currency exchange market is
0 national saving.
0 net exports.
1 net foreign investment.
0 domestic investment.

Ceteris paribus, if the Italian real interest rate were to decrease, Italian net foreign investment 
1 would rise, while net foreign investment of other countries would fall.
0 would fall, while net foreign investment of other countries would rise.
0 and net foreign investment of other countries would rise.
0 and net foreign investment of other countries would fall.

Between 1995 and 1998 Sweden decreased their budget deficit. This change shifted Sweden’s
0 demand for loanable funds left.
0 demand for loanable funds right.
0 supply of loanable funds left.
1 supply of loanable funds right.

Which of the following increases when the budget deficit of the United States increases?
0 U.S. supply of loanable funds.
0 net foreign investment.
1 the real exchange rate.
0 None of the above is correct.

In the 1980s the U.S. budget deficit rose. At the same time the U.S. trade deficit grew larger, the real exchange rate of the dollar appreciated, and U.S. net foreign investment decreased. Which of these events is consistent with what the open-economy macroeconomic model predicts concerning the effects of an increase in the budget deficit?
0 The U.S. trade deficit grew.
0 The real exchange rate of the dollar appreciated.
0 U.S. net foreign investment fell.
1 All of the above are consistent with the predictions of the model.

Suppose that the United States imposes an import quota on farm machinery. This shifts the
1 demand for dollars in the foreign-currency exchange market right.
0 demand for dollars in the foreign-currency exchange market left.
0 supply of dollars in the foreign-currency exchange market right.
0 supply of dollars in the foreign-currency exchange market left.

Suppose that the United States imposes an import quota on furniture. The quota makes the real exchange rate of U.S. dollars
0 appreciate and the real interest rate in the United States increase.
1 appreciate but does not change the real interest rate in the United States.
0 depreciate and the real interest rate in the United States decrease.
0 depreciate but does not change the real interest rate in the United States.

If U.S. citizens decide to save a larger fraction of their incomes, the real interest rate
1 decreases, the real exchange rate of the dollar depreciates, and U.S. net foreign investment increases.
0 decreases, the real exchange rate of the dollar appreciates, and U.S. net foreign investment decreases.
0 increases, the real exchange rate of the dollar appreciates, and U.S. net foreign investment decreases.
0 increases, the real exchange rate of the dollar depreciates, and U.S. net foreign investment increases.

If U.S. firms decide to invest more domestically at each interest rate, the real interest rate in the U.S.
0 decreases, the real exchange rate of the dollar depreciates, and U.S. net foreign investment decreases.
0 decreases, the real exchange rate of the dollar appreciates, and U.S. net foreign investment increases.
0 increases, the real exchange rate of the dollar depreciates, and U.S. net foreign investment increases.
1 increases, the real exchange rate of the dollar appreciates, and U.S. net foreign investment decreases.

Trade policies 
0 alter the trade balance because they alter imports of the country that implemented them.
0 alter the trade balance because they alter net foreign investment of the country that implements them.
1 do not alter the trade balance because they cannot alter the national saving or domestic investment of the country that implements them.
0 do not alter the trade balance because they cannot alter the real exchange rate of the currency of the country that implements them.

When Mexico suffered from capital flight in 1994, Mexico’s real interest rate 
0 fell and the peso appreciated.
0 fell and the peso depreciated.
0 rose and the peso appreciated.
1 rose and the peso depreciated.

When a country suffers from capital flight, the demand for loanable funds
0 and the supply of currency in the foreign-exchange market shifts left.
1 and the supply of currency in the foreign-exchange market shifts right.
0 shifts right while the supply of currency in the foreign-exchange market shifts left.
0 shifts left while the supply of currency in the foreign-exchange market shifts right.

When Mexico suffered from capital flight in 1994, the U.S. real interest rate 
1 fell and the real exchange rate of the dollar appreciated.
0 fell and the real exchange rate of the dollar depreciated.
0 rose and the real exchange rate of the dollar appreciated.
0 rose and the real exchange rate of the dollar depreciated.


Which of the following would cause the real exchange rate of the U.S. dollar to appreciate?
0 capital flight from the United States
0 if the U.S. government increases the budget surplus
1 if the U.S. government imposes import quotas
0 All of the above are correct.

Which of the following will increase U.S. net foreign investment?
1 if the government increases the budget surplus
0 capital flight from other countries
0 if the United States removes import quotas
0 All of the above are correct.

Which of the following concerning the open-economy macro model is correct?
1 It assumes that real GDP is fixed.
0 It assumes that the interest rate adjusts to bring the supply of and demand for money into balance.
0 It considers what happens simultaneously in the money market and the market for foreign currency.
0 All of the above are correct.

The supply of loanable funds comes from
0 national saving. Demand for loanable funds comes from only domestic investment.
1 national saving. Demand for loanable funds comes from domestic and net foreign investment.
0 only net foreign investment. Demand for loanable funds comes from national saving.
0 domestic investment and net foreign investment. Demand for loanable funds comes from national saving.

Jack and Jill are co-owners of the U.S. firm Wells Petroleum. Jack builds an oil well in Texas. Jill builds an oil well in Venezuela.
0 Neither Jack’s nor Jill’s purchase of capital count as demand for loanable funds in the U.S. market.
0 Jack’s purchase of capital counts as demand for loanable funds in the U.S. maket; Jill’s purchase does not.
0 Jill’s purchase of capital counts as demand for loanable funds in the U.S. market; Jack’s purchase does not.
1 Both Jack’s and Jill’s purchase of capital count as demand for loanable funds in the U.S. market.

Other things the same an increase in the U.S. real interest rate relative to real interest rates in other countries 
0 decreases the quantity of loanable funds supplied in the U.S. market.
1 decreases U.S. domestic investment.
0 increases U.S. net foreign investment.
0 All of the above are correct.

Which of the following would increase both the real interest rate and the quantity of loanable funds?
0 The supply of loanable funds shifts left.
0 The supply of loanable funds shifts right.
0 The demand for loanable funds shifts left.
1 The demand for loanable funds shifts right.

Which of the following would be shown by shifting the supply of loanable funds right?
1 People want to save more at each interest rate.
0 People want to invest more domestically at each interest rate.
0 People want to purchase more foreign capital at each interest rate.
0 All of the above are correct.

In the open-economy macroeconomic model, which of the following happens in response to an appreciation of the real exchange rate?
0 The quantity of dollars demanded in the foreign-exchange market increases.
1 The quantity of dollars demanded in the foreign-exchange market decreases.
0 The quantity of dollars supplied in the foreign-exchange market increases.
0 The quantity of dollars supplied in the foreign-exchange market decreases.

If the real interest rate in the United States falls relative to real interest rates in other countries, U.S. net foreign investment
0 increases, the supply of dollars in the foreign exchange market shifts right, and the real exchange rate of the dollar appreciates.
1 increases, the supply of dollars in the foreign exchange market shifts right, and the real exchange rate of the dollar depreciates.
0 decreases, the supply of dollars in the foreign exchange market shifts left, and the real exchange rate of the dollar appreciates. 
0 decreases, the supply of dollars in the foreign exchange market shifts left, and the real exchange rate of the dollar depreciates.

In the open-economy macroeconomic model, if the real exchange rate was above the equilibrium level, which of the following would rise?
0 the real exchange rate
1 net exports
0 net foreign investment
0 All of the above are correct.

When the supply of loanable funds shifts right, which of the following increases?
0 net foreign investment and the real exchange rate
1 net foreign investment, but not the real exchange rate
0 the real exchange rate, but not net foreign investment
0 neither the real exchange rate nor net foreign investment

Which of the following would increase the real exchange rate?
0 the demand for loanable funds shifts left
0 the supply of loanable funds shifts right
1 an increase in the demand for dollars in the foreign-currency exchange market
0 All of the above are correct.

In recent years the budget deficit of Thailand has increased. According to the open- economy macroeconomic model this should have caused which curve to shift right?
0 the Thai supply of loanable funds
0 the Thai demand for loanable funds
0 the supply of Thai currency
1 None of the above shift right

Between 1814 and 1829 the U.S. government debt fell. This should have 
0 increased interest rates and net foreign investment.
0 decreased interest rates and net foreign investment.
0 increased interest rates and decreased net foreign investment.
1 decreased interest rates and increased net foreign investment.

An increase in budget deficits will
1 increase the trade deficit.
0 decrease the trade deficit.
0 increase net foreign investment.
0 have no impact on the trade deficit.

Suppose sheep ranchers in Tiberius convince the government to prohibit the import of wool into Tiberius. According to the open-economy macroeconomic model this will cause the Tiberian currency to
0 appreciate and decrease net exports.
1 appreciate, but have no effect on net exports.
0 depreciate, but have no effect on net exports.
0 depreciate and increase net exports.

Suppose that conservationists in Sherwood convince the government to prohibit the export of timber from Sherwood. According to the open-economy macroeconomic model this will
0 reduce Sherwood’s net exports, and cause their real exchange rate to appreciate.
0 reduce Sherwood’s net exports, and cause their real exchange rate to depreciate
0 have no effect on Sherwood’s net exports, and cause their real exchange rate to appreciate.
1 have no effect on Sherwood’s net exports, and cause their real exchange rate to depreicate.

The restriction on imports of Japanese vehicles into the United States has: 
1 caused the real exchange rate to appreciate.
0 caused net exports in the United States to decline.
0 decreased the demand for loanable funds in the United States.
0 increased net foreign investment in the United States.

Molly Price, economic detective, meets a client who wants to know why interest rates have risen and the real exchange rate appreciated. The client suspects four causes; which one is consistent with the facts?
0 Import quotas were imposed.
0 Import quotas were removed.
1 The budget deficit increased.
0 The budget deficit decreased.

The country of Monac experiences a coup that causes capital flight from the country. As a result
0 net foreign investment in Monac will decrease.
1 the demand for loanable funds in Monac will increase.
0 the supply of loanable funds in Monac will increase.
0 the exchange rate in Monac will increase.

Between 1992 and 1999 it is estimated that Russia had capital flight of about $150 billion. Other things the same, we would expect that this capital flight has resulted in
0 falling domestic interest rates and an appreciation of the Russian currency.
0 falling domestic interest rates and a depreciation of the Russian currency.
0 rising domestic interest rates and an appreciation of the Russian currency.
1 rising domestic interest rates and a depreciation of the Russian currency.

If people feel that it has become riskier to buy the capital assets of some country, perhaps because of increased political instability, then interest rates 
1 rise and the local currency depreciates.
0 rise and the local currency appreciates.
0 fall and the local currency appreciates.
0 fall and the local currency depreciates.

If there is capital flight
0 both the supply of loanable funds and the supply of the local currency in the foreign exchange market shift right.
0 both the supply of loanable funds and the demand for the local currency in the foreign exchange market shift left.
1 both the demand for loanable funds and the supply of the local currency in the foreign exchange market shift right.
0 None of the above is correct.

Which of the following raises interest rates and causes appreciation of the local currency?
0 capital flight
0 restrictrive trade policies
1 an increase in the budget deficit
0 All of the above are correct

Business cycles
0 are explained mostly by fluctuations in corporate profits.
0 no longer are very important due to government policy.
1 are fluctuations in real GDP and related variables over time.
0 All of the above are correct.

Investment is a
0 large part of real GDP, so it accounts for a small share of the fluctuation in real GDP.
0 large part of real GDP, yet it accounts for a large share of the fluctuation in real GDP.
0 small part of real GDP, so it accounts for a small share of the fluctuation in real GDP.
1 small part of real GDP, yet it accounts for a large share of the fluctuation in real GDP.

According to classical economic theory, changes in the money supply affect
0 nominal variables and real variables.
0 neither nominal nor real variables.
0 real variables, but not nominal variables.
1 nominal variables, but not real variables.

Most economists believe that classical economic theory is a good description of the world in
1 the long run, but not in the short run.
0 the short run, but not in the long run.
0 the short run and in the long run.
0 neither the short nor long run.

The effect of an increase in the price level is represented by a
0 shift to the right of the aggregate demand curve.
0 shift to the left of the aggregate demand curve.
1 movement to the left along a given aggregate demand curve.
0 movement to the right along a given aggregate demand curve.

People will spend less if the price level
0 rises, making the dollars they hold worth more.
1 rises, making the dollars they hold worth less.
0 falls, making the dollars they hold worth more.
0 falls, making the dollars they hold worth less.

A decrease in U.S. interest rates leads to 
0 an appreciation of the dollar that leads to smaller exports.
0 an appreciation of the dollar that leads to greater net exports.
0 a depreciation of the dollar that leads to smaller net exports.
1 a depreciation of the dollar that leads to greater net exports.

Suppose a stock market crash makes people feel poorer. This decrease in wealth would cause people to 
0 decrease consumption, which shifts aggregate supply left.
1 decrease consumption, which shifts aggregate demand left.
0 increase consumption, which shifts aggregate supply right.
0 increase consumption, which shifts aggregate demand right.

Aggregate demand shifts right when the government 
1 institutes an investment tax credit.
0 raises personal income taxes.
0 decreases the money supply.
0 All of the above are correct.

The long-run aggregate supply curve shifts right if
0 Congress raises the minimum wage substantially.
0 unemployment insurance benefits are made more generous.
1 immigration from abroad increases.
0 All of the above are correct.

In the long run, technological progress
0 makes the price level rise, while increases in the money supply make prices fall.
1 makes the price level fall, while increases in the money supply make prices rise.
0 and increases in the money supply both make the price level rise.
0 and increases in the money supply both make the price level fall.

The misperceptions theory of the short-run aggregate supply curve says that output supplied will decrease if the price level increases
0 more than expected so that firms believe the relative price of their output has increased.
0 more than expected so that firms believe the relative price of their output has decreased.
0 less than expected so that firms believe the relative price of their output has increased.
1 less than expected so that firms believe the relative price of their output has decreased.

The sticky wage theory of the short-run aggregate supply curve says that when the price level rises more than expected, the real wage
0 rises, so employment falls.
0 rises, so employment rises.
0 falls, so employment falls.
1 falls, so employment rises.

The sticky price theory of the short-run aggregate supply curve says that when the price level rises more than expected, some firms will have 
1 lower prices than they desire, which increases their sales.
0 lower prices than they desire, which depresses their sales.
0 higher prices than they desire, which increases their sales.
0 higher prices than they desire, which depresses their sales.

Assuming that a is positive, theories of short-run aggregate supply are expressed mathematically as quantity of output supplied =
0 natural rate of output + a(expected price level – actual price level).
0 a(actual price level – expected price level) – natural rate of output.
0 a(expected price level – actual price level) – natural rate of output.
1 natural rate of output + a(actual price level – expected price level).

An increase in the expected price level shifts short-run aggregate supply to the
0 left and an increase in the actual price level shifts short-run aggregate supply to the left.
1 left and an increase in the actual price level does not shift short-run aggregate supply.
0 right and an increase in the actual price level shifts short-run aggregate supply to the right.
0 right and an increase in the actual price level does not shift short-run aggregate supply.



Suppose a shift in aggregate demand creates an economic contraction. If policymakers can respond with sufficient speed and precision, they can offset the initial shift by shifting aggregate
0 supply left.
0 supply right.
0 demand left.
1 demand right.

Suppose the economy is initially in long-run equilibrium and aggregate demand rises. Compared to where the economy was before the change in aggregate demand, in the long run prices
0 and output are higher.
0 and output are lower.
1 are higher and output is the same.
0 are the same and output is lower.

Which of the following has been suggested as an important cause of the Great Depression?
1 a decline in the money supply
0 a large decline in government expenditures
0 an increase in the relative price of oil
0 All of the above are correct.

During World War II
0 government purchases of goods and services roughly doubled.
0 the economy’s production increased almost fivefold.
1 prices rose about 20 percent.
0 None of the above is correct.

Suppose that there has been bad weather, a decrease in the availability of oil or some other temporary increase in firms’ costs. In the short run prices
0 fall and output rises.
1 rise and output falls.
0 and output rise.
0 and output fall.

Which of the following would cause stagflation?
0 Aggregate supply shifts right.
1 Aggregate supply shifts left.
0 Aggregate demand shifts right.
0 Aggregate demand shifts left.

Keynes believed that economies experiencing high unemployment should adopt policies to
1 increase aggregate demand.
0 increase aggregate supply.
0 reduce the money supply.
0 reduce government expenditures.

According to the crowding-out effect, an increase in government purchases causes interest rates to
0 fall, which increases saving.
0 fall, which decreases investment.
0 rise, which increases saving.
1 rise, which decreases investment.

Recession refers principally to
0 below average real GDP growth. 
1 negative real GDP growth. 
0 below average inflation.
0 negative inflation.

Which of the following is correct? 
1 On average over the past 50 years real GDP has grown about 3% per year. 
0 Recessions occur at regular intervals.
0 Both of the above are correct.
0 None of the above is correct.

During recessions investment
0 and unemployment rise. 
0 and unemployment decline.
0 rises and unemployment declines. 
1 declines and unemployment rises. 

Which of the following accounts for most of the decline in value of GDP during recessions? 
0 consumption 
1 investment 
0 government expenditures
0 net exports 

Long-run analysis of the macroeconomy is based on 
1 both the classical dichotomy and monetary neutrality. 
0 neither the classical dichotomy nor monetary neutrality.
0 the classical dichotomy, but not monetary neutrality. 
0 monetary neutrality but not the classical dichotomy. 

In the aggregate demand and aggregate supply model the price level is on the
0 horizontal axis and quantity of output is on the vertical axis.
1 vertical axis and quantity of output is on the horizontal axis. 
0 horizontal axis and unemployment is on the vertical axis.
0 vertical axis and unemployment is on horizontal axis. 

A fall in prices makes consumers feel more wealthy. As a result
0 aggregate demand shifts to the left.
0 aggregate demand shifts to the right.
0 there is a movement up a given aggregate demand curve.
1 there is a movement down a given aggregate demand curve.

When prices fall, dollars are worth
0 less, so consumers demand a larger quantity of goods. 
0 less, so consumers demand a smaller quantity of goods.
1 more, so consumers demand a larger quantity of goods.
0 more, so consumers demand a smaller quantity of goods.

When the price level rises, other things the same, people want to
1 increase money holdings, so the interest rate increases.
0 increase money holdings, so the interest rate decreases. 
0 reduce money holdings, so the interest rate increases. 
0 reduce money holdings, so the interest rate decreases.

Other things the same, which of the following happens when the price level falls?
0 Households try to increase money holdings.
0 The real exchange rate appreciates. 
1 U.S. net exports increase. 
0 All of the above are correct.

Which of the following tends to increase the quantity of output demanded when the price level decreases? 
0 the wealth effect 
0 the interest rate effect 
0 the exchange rate effect
1 All of the above are correct.

	If people decide to save more for retirement 
0 or the government raises taxes, aggregate demand will shift right. 
1 or the government raises taxes, aggregate demand will shift left. 
0 aggregate demand will shift right. If the government raises taxes, aggregate demand will shift left. 
0 aggregate demand will shift left. If the government raises taxes, aggregate demand will shift right. 

Which of the following do we expect in the short run if the money supply increases? 
0 The interest rate rises. 
0 Investment falls. 
1 The price level rises. 
0 All of the above are correct.

Suppose there is a broad increase in the price of stocks which causes an increase in the real wealth of individuals. Consumption spending rises in response to the increase in wealth. This will cause the
0 aggregate demand curve to shift to the left.
1 rate of unemployment to decrease.
0 general price level to fall.
0 aggregate supply curve to shift to the right.

Which of the following shifts the long-run aggregate supply curve to the left? 
0 an increase in the economy’s capital stock
0 an increase in the availability of natural resources from abroad 
1 stricter environmental regulations 
0 None of the above is correct. 

By itself technological progress tends to 
1 raise real GDP and lower the price level. 
0 raise both real GDP and the price level.
0 decrease both real GDP and the price level. 
0 decrease real GDP and raise the price level. 

According to the aggregate demand and aggregate supply model, in the long run an increase in the money supply 
0 increases the price level and real GDP.
1 increases the price level, but does not change real GDP.
0 increases real GDP, but does not change the price level.
0 decreases real GDP, but does not change the price level.

If the price level is less than expected, producers believe their relative price has
0 increased and so increase production. 
0 increased and so decrease production.
0 decreased and so increase production. 
1 decreased and so decrease production. 

If wages do not adjust immediately to the price level, a higher price level 
0 reduces real wages and employment. 
0 increases real wages and employment. 
1 reduces real wages and increases employment. 
0 increases real wages and reduces employment. 

An increase in the expected price level shifts aggregate
0 demand to the right.
0 demand to the left.
0 supply to the right.
1 supply to the left.

A change in price expectations will shift
1 short-run aggregate supply, but not long-run aggregate supply.
0 long-run aggregate supply, but not short-run aggregate supply.
0 both long-run aggregate supply and short-run aggregate supply.
0 long-run aggregate supply and aggregate demand.

Suppose consumers become more pessimistic concerning the future of an economy. In the short run 
0 both the price level and real GDP rise. 
1 both the price level and real GDP fall. 
0 the price level rises and real GDP falls.
0 the price level falls and real GDP rises. 

During the 1930s
0 and the 1940s U.S. aggregate demand appears to have shifted far to the left.
0 and the 1940s U.S. aggregate demand appears to have shifted far to the right.
0 U.S. aggregate demand appears to have shifted far to the right. During the 1940s aggregate demand appears to have shifted far to the left.
1 U.S. aggregate demand appears to have shifted far to the left. During the 1940s aggregate demand appears to have shifted far to the right.

Which of the following is associated primarily with aggregate supply shifting far to the left?
0 the Great Depression
0 the economic boom of the 1940s
1 stagflation of the 1970s
0 None of the above is correct.

If the economy is experiencing stagflation and the Fed increases the money supply in the short run output
1 increases, in the long run the price level increases.
0 increases, in the long run the price level decreases.
0 decreases, in the long run the price level increases.
0 decreases, in the long run the price level decreases.

Shocks to the economy such as changes in the value of the stock market
0 affect aggregate demand, but changes in taxes and government expenditures do not.
1 and changes in taxes and government expenditures affect aggregate demand.
0 do not affect aggregate demand, but changes in taxes and government expenditures do.
0 and changes in taxes and government expenditures do not affect aggregate demand.

Which of the following claims concerning the importance of effects that explain the slope of the aggregate demand curve is correct?
1 The interest-rate effect is relatively large because investment spending is very responsive to interest rate changes.
0 The wealth effect is relatively large because money holdings are a significant portion of most households’ wealth.
0 The exchange rate effect is relatively large because exports and imports comprise a large part of real GDP.
0 None of the above is correct.

When the interest rate decreases, the opportunity cost of holding money
0 increases, so the quantity of money demanded increases.
0 increases, so the quantity of money demanded decreases.
1 decreases, so the quantity of money demanded increases.
0 decreases, so the quantity of money demanded decreases.

According to liquidity preference theory, if there is an excess supply of money, people will deposit
0 less into interest-bearing accounts, so the interest rate rises.
0 less into interest-bearing accounts, so the interest rate falls.
0 more into interest-bearing accounts, so the interest rate rises.
1 more into interest-bearing accounts, so the interest rate falls.

Which list contains only things that would make people want to hold more money?
1 Interest rates decrease, the price level increases.
0 Interest rates decrease, the price level decreases.
0 Interest rates increase, the price level increases.
0 Interest rates increase, the price level decreases.

Assume the money market is initially in equilibrium. If the price level increases, according to liquidity preference theory there is an excess
0 supply of money until the interest rate decreases.
0 supply of money until the interest rate increases.
0 demand for money until the interest rate decreases.
1 demand for money until the interest rate increases.

According to liquidity preference theory, which of the following shifts the money demand curve to the left?
1 a decrease in the price level
0 an increase in the price level
0 an increase in the interest rate
0 Both b and c are correct.

According to liquidity preference theory, an increase in the price level causes the interest rate to
0 increase, which makes investment demanded increase.
1 increase, which makes investment demanded decrease.
0 decrease, which makes investment demanded increase.
0 decrease, which makes investment demanded decrease.

In the short run, a decrease in the money supply causes interest rates to 
0 decrease, and aggregate demand to shift right.
0 decrease, and aggregate demand to shift left.
0 increase, and aggregate demand to shift right.
1 increase, and aggregate demand to shift left.

If the interest rate is above the Fed’s target, the Fed should
0 sell bonds to increase the money supply.
0 sell bonds to decrease the money supply.
1 buy bonds to increase the money supply.
0 buy bonds to decrease the money supply.

If the stock market crashes, aggregate demand
0 increases, which the Fed could offset by selling bonds.
0 increases, which the Fed could offset by buying bonds.
0 decreases, which the Fed could offset by selling bonds.
1 decreases, which the Fed could offset by buying bonds.

An increase in government spending initially and primarily shifts aggregate
0 supply right.
1 demand right.
0 demand left.
0 supply left.

The multiplier effect is the multiplied impact on
0 investment of a given increase in interest rates.
0 the money supply of a given increase in government purchases.
1 aggregate demand of a given increase in government purchases.
0 tax revenues of a given increase in government purchases.

Which of the following illustrates how the investment accelerator works?
1 An increase in government expenditures increases aggregate spending so that the Gas-and-Go convenience store chain finds it profitable to build more new stores.
0 An increase in government expenditures increases the interest rate so that people buy fewer stocks and bonds.
0 An increase in government expenditures decreases the interest rate so that the Gas-and-Go convenience store chain decides to build more new stores.
0 An increase in government expenditures increases the interest rate so that the Gas-and-Go convenience store chain decides to build fewer new stores.

The government purchases multiplier is defined as 
0 MPC.
0 1 – MPC.
1 1/(1 – MPC).
0 1/MPC.

According to the crowding-out effect, an increase in government purchases causes interest rates to
0 fall, which increases saving.
0 fall, which decreases investment.
0 rise, which increases saving.
1 rise, which decreases investment.

If taxes
1 increase, consumption decreases, and aggregate demand shifts left.	
0 increase, consumption increases, and aggregate demand shifts right.
0 decrease, consumption increases, and aggregate demand shifts left.
0 decrease, consumption decreases, and aggregate demand shifts right.

An increase in government spending on goods to build or repair bridges and highways
0 shifts the aggregate demand curve to the left.
0 has no multiplier effect.
1 shifts the aggregate supply curve to the right in the long run.
0 All of the above are correct.

If Congress cuts spending to balance the federal budget, the Fed can act to prevent unemployment and recession while maintaining the balanced budget by
0 raising taxes.
0 cutting expenditures.
1 increasing the money supply.
0 decreasing the money supply.

Which of the following actions is inconsistent with the Employment Act of 1946?
0 When there is a recession, the government increases the money supply.
1 When unemployment is high, the government decreases expenditures.
0 When there is a recession, the government cuts taxes.
0 All of the above are correct.

Keynes argued that aggregate demand is
0 stable, because the economy returns to long-run equilibrium.
0 stable, because changes in consumption are mostly offset by changes in investment.
0 unstable, because seasonal variations create fluctuations in aggregate demand.
1 unstable, because waves of pessimism and optimism create fluctuations in aggregate demand.

If the government wants to stabilize output, which of the following policy alternatives would be an appropriate response to an increase in investment demand?
1 increase taxes
0 increase the money supply
0 increase government expenditures
0 All of the above are correct.

Investment tax credits are designed to 
1 increase aggregate demand in the short run and eventually increase long-run aggregate supply.
0 increase aggregate demand in the short run, but eventually decrease long-run aggregate supply.
0 increase aggregate demand in the short run and have no impact on aggregate supply.
0 None of the above is correct.

During expansions, automatic stabilizers make the government’s budget move
0 toward deficit.
1 toward surplus.
0 toward balance.
0 in no particular direction.

When the Fed lowers the growth rate of the money supply, it must take into account
0 only the short-run effect on production.
0 only the short-run effects on inflation and production.
1 the long-run effect on inflation as well as the short-run effect on production.
0 only the long-run effect on inflation.

Of the effects that help explain why the U.S. aggregate demand curve slopes downward the
0 wealth effect is most important and the exchange rate effect is least important.
0 exchange-rate effect is most important and the interest rate effect is least important.
1 interest-rate effect is most important and the wealth effect is least important.
0 None of the above is correct.

Liquidity preference theory is most relevant to the 
1 short run and supposes that the interest rate adjusts to bring money supply and money demand into balance. 
0 short run and supposes that the price level adjusts to bring money supply and money demand into balance. 
0 long run and supposes that the interest rate adjusts to bring money supply and money demand into balance.
0 long run and supposes that the price level adjusts to bring money supply and money demand into balance. 

An increase in interest rates
0 increases the cost of holding money and increases the quantity demanded.
1 increases the cost of holding money and decreases the quantity demanded. 
0 decreases the cost of holding money and increases the quantity demanded. 
0 decreases the cost of holding money and decreases the quantity demanded. 

According to the theory of liquidity preference if there is a surplus of money, the interest rate will
0 rise and the quantity of money demanded will increase.
0 rise and the quantity of money demanded will decrease.
1 fall and the quantity of money demanded will increase.
0 fall and the quantity of money demanded will decrease.

With the interest rate on the vertical axis, an increase in the price level shifts money
0 supply right.
0 supply left.
1 demand right.
0 demand left.


Which of the following properly describes the interest-rate effect?
0 A higher price level leads to higher money demand, higher money demand leads to higher interest rates, and a higher interest rate increases the quantity of goods and services demanded.
0 A higher price level leads to higher money demand, higher money demand leads to lower interest rates, and a lower interest rate reduces the quantity of goods and services demanded.
0 A lower price level leads to lower money demand, lower money demand leads to lower interest rates, and a lower interest rate reduces the quantity of goods and services demanded.
1 A lower price level leads to lower money demand, lower money demand leads to lower interest rates, and a lower interest rate increases the quantity of goods and services demanded.

When the money supply increases interest rates
0 rise and aggregate demand shifts right.
0 fall and aggregate demand shifts left.
0 rise and aggregate demand shifts left.
1 None of the above is correct.

Which of the following shifts aggregate demand right?
0 The price level rises.
0 The price level falls.
1 The money supply rises.
0 Both a and b are correct.

Suppose the Federal Reserve decreases the money supply. As a result: 
1 investment, real output, and the price level are all lower.
0 investment is higher, real output is lower, and the price level is unchanged.
0 investment, real output, and the price level are all higher.
0 investment is lower, real output is higher, and the price level is lower.

If the stock market booms household spending
0 increases. To offset the effects of this on the price level and real GDP, the Fed would increase the money supply.
1 increases. To offset the effects of this on the price level and real GDP, the Fed would decrease the money supply.
0 decreases. To offset the effects of this on the price level and real GDP, the Fed would increase the money supply.
0 decreases. To offset the effects of this on the price level and real GDP, the Fed would decrease the money supply.

In early January 2000 the Fed announced that it would cut interest rates one-half percentage point. To do this requires the Fed to
1 increase the money supply and so increase aggregate demand.
0 increase the money supply and so decrease aggregate demand.
0 decrease the money supply and so increase aggregate demand.
0 decrease the money supply and so decrease aggregate demand.

In the last quarter of 1999 German real GDP grew at a very low rate. Some economists attributed the low growth to monetary policy that by itself would have decreased real GDP. If they are correct, we should observe that the German money supply 
0 and interest rates had increased.
0 and interest rates had decreased.
0 had increased and interest rates had decreased.
1 had decreased and interest rates had increased.

When the Fed decreases the money supply we expect interest rates
0 and stock prices to rise.
0 and stock prices to fall.
1 to rise and stock prices to fall.
0 to fall and stock prices to rise.

If the government increases its expenditures the price level
1 and real GDP both rise.
0 and real GDP both fall.
0 rises and real GDP falls.
0 falls and real GDP rises.

Suppose that the MPC is .60 and there is no investment accelerator or crowding out. Then if government expenditures increase $10 billion, aggregate demand shifts right
0 $40 billion.
1 $25 billion.
0 $16 billion.
0 None of the above is correct.

The multiplier effect occurs because an increase in government purchases will
1 increase income which will result in further rounds of spending.
0 increase interest rates which will reduce further rounds of spending.
0 increase the government deficit which will decrease further rounds of spending.
0 stimulate monetary policy which will increase further rounds of spending.

Which of the following correctly explains the crowding-out effect?
0 An increase in government expenditures decreases the interest rate and so increases investment spending.
1 An increase in government expenditures increases the interest rate and so reduces investment spending.
0 A decrease in government expenditures increases the interest rate and so increases investment spending.
0 A decrease in government expenditures decreases the interest rate and so reduces investment spending.


When the government increases expenditures the money demand curve shifts
1 right and interest rates rise.
0 right and interest rates fall.
0 left and interest rates rise.
0 left and interest rates fall.

Permanent tax cuts shift the AD curve
1 farther to the right than temporary tax cuts.
0 less to the right than temporary tax cuts.
0 farther to the left than temporary tax cuts.
0 less to the left than temporary tax cuts.

Suppose that net exports fall. Which of the following policies is most likely to stabilize the economy?
0 a decrease in the money supply
0 a tax increase
1 an increase in government expenditures
0 None of the above would be likely to stabilize the economy.

If the government wanted to stabilize the economy when it was in recession it would
0 raise interest rates and government expenditures.
0 decrease interest rates and government expenditures.
0 raise interest rates and decrease government expenditures.
1 decrease interest rates and increase government expenditures.

Critics of using fiscal and monetary policies to solve economic problems believe that
0 it can take too long for monetary policy to have an impact on the economy.
0 the political process results in a lag when using fiscal policy.
0 economic forecasting is imprecise.
1 All of the above are correct.

The most important automatic stabilizer is
0 open market transactions.
1 the tax system.
0 unemployment compensation.
0 welfare benefits.

The misery index is calculated as the
0 actual inflation rate minus the expected inflation rate.
0 natural unemployment rate plus the long-run inflation rate.
0 unemployment rate minus the inflation rate.
1 inflation rate plus the unemployment rate.

The short-run relationship between inflation and unemployment is often called 
0 Samuelson’s dilemma.
0 Harrod’s knife edge.
1 the Phillips curve.
0 Barro’s conundrum.

Phillips found a negative relation between
0 output and unemployment.
0 output and employment.	
0 wage inflation and output.
1 wage inflation and unemployment.

Samuelson and Solow reasoned that when aggregate demand was high, unemployment was
1 low, so there was upward pressure on wages and prices.
0 low, so there was downward pressure on wages and prices.
0 high, so there was upward pressure on wages and prices.
0 high, so there was downward pressure on wages and prices.



According to Friedman and Phelps, no matter what the Fed does to the money supply, in the long run, the
0 economy will have a zero inflation rate.
0 inflation rate will tend to its natural rate.
0 economy will have a zero unemployment rate.
1 unemployment rate will tend toward its natural rate.

Which of the following would shift the long-run Phillips curve right?
1 increases in unemployment compensation
0 an increase in the money supply
0 an increase in the expected inflation rate
0 None of the above is correct.

If the long-run Phillips curve shifts to the right, for any given rate of money growth and inflation the economy will have
0 higher unemployment and higher output.
1 higher unemployment and lower output.
0 lower unemployment and higher output.
0 lower unemployment and lower output.

An increase in expected inflation shifts the 
0 long-run Phillips curve right.
0 long-run Phillips curve left.
1 short-run Phillips curve right.
0 short-run Phillips curve left.

The long-run and short-run Phillips curves intersect where
0 the quantity of goods and services demanded equals the quantity supplied.
0 the quantity of labor demanded equals the quantity supplied.
0 expected inflation is greater than actual inflation.
1 expected inflation equals actual inflation.

According to Friedman and Phelps, the unemployment rate is above the natural rate when actual inflation
0 is greater than expected inflation.
0 equals expected inflation.
1 is less than expected inflation.
0 is high.

Faced with an adverse supply shock, policymakers can increase aggregate
0 supply, which increases prices and output.
0 supply, which decreases prices and increases output.
1 demand, which increases prices and output.
0 demand, which decreases prices and increases output.

A favorable supply shock will cause the short-run Phillips curve to shift 
0 left, and unemployment to rise.
1 left, and unemployment to fall.
0 right, and unemployment to rise.
0 right, and unemployment to fall.

An adverse supply shock will cause the short-run Phillips curve to shift 
0 right, and inflation to fall.
1 right, and inflation to rise.
0 left, and inflation to fall.
0 left, and inflation to rise.

In the 1970s, the Fed accommodated
1 an adverse supply shock and so contributed to higher inflation.
0 an adverse supply shock and so contributed to lower inflation.
0 a favorable supply shock and so contributed to higher inflation.
0 a favorable supply shock and so contributed to lower inflation.

In 1979, Fed Chair Paul Volcker decided to pursue a policy
1 that would lead to disinflation.
0 that would create falling prices.
0 to accommodate continuing adverse supply shocks.
0 None of the above is correct.

If the sacrifice ratio is 3, reducing the inflation rate from 5 percent to 2 percent would require sacrificing 
0 6 percent of annual output.
1 9 percent of annual output.
0 10 percent of annual output.
0 15 percent of annual output.

In 1979, Fed Chair Paul Volcker
1 believed decreasing inflation would temporarily decrease output growth.
0 instituted an accommodating monetary policy.
0 believed that inflation had not yet reached unacceptable levels.
0 All of the above are correct.

In the late 1970s proponents of rational expectations argued that
0 the short run might be long because people wouldn’t go to the trouble of computing inflation expectations.
1 if people expected a decrease in the money supply growth rate and inflation, the decrease in the money growth would have little or no affect on output.
0 Friedman and Phelps were wrong about the long run, because inflation expectations would never adjust to return the economy to the natural rate of unemployment.
0 Friedman and Phelps were wrong because there was no short run since people always anticipated inflation correctly.

The restrictive monetary policy followed by the Fed in the early 1980s
0 reduced both unemployment and inflation.
1 reduced inflation significantly, but at the cost of a severe recession.
0 reduced unemployment significantly, but at the cost of higher inflation.
0 raised both unemployment and inflation.

The experience of the Volcker disinflation of the early 1980s
0 generally increased estimates of the sacrifice ratio.
1 generally decreased estimates of the sacrifice ratio.	
0 clearly refuted the predictions of the proponents of rational expectations.
0 clearly refuted the predictions of the opponents of rational expectations.

Since 1984, the economy has experienced
0 no unemployment rate above the natural rate.
0 a severe recession during 1991 and 1992.
0 uninterrupted economic growth.
1 relatively mild fluctuations in inflation and unemployment.

In 1999, the Phillips curve was fairly far to the
0 right, partly because of lower inflation expectations.
0 right, partly because of adverse supply shocks.
1 left; partly because of lower inflation expectations.
0 left; partly because of adverse supply shocks.

In the late 1990s,
0 aggregate supply apparently shifted left.
0 the Phillips curve apparently shifted right.
0 Both a and b are correct.
1 Neither a nor b is correct.

In order to reduce inflation an economy will typically endure a period of
1 high unemployment and low output.
0 high unemployment and high output.
0 low unemployment and low output.
0 low unemployment and high output.

The Phillips curve shows the relationship between the
0 price level and real GDP.
0 price level and unemployment.
0 inflation rate and the price level.
1 inflation rate and unemployment.

If the government decided that it wanted lower inflation it would
0 increase aggregate demand which would increase unemployment.
0 increase aggregate demand which would decrease unemployment.
1 decrease aggregate demand which would increase unemployment.
0 decrease aggregate demand which would decrease unemployment.

Which of the following lists contains only policies that would increase inflation and decrease unemployment?
1 increase government expenditures, increase the money supply
0 increase government expenditures, decrease the money supply
0 decrease government expenditures, increase the money supply
0 decrease government expenditures, decrease the money supply

Friedman and Phelps argued that an inverse relation between inflation and unemployment could exist
0 in both the long run and the short run.
0 in neither the short run nor the long run.
1 only in the short run.
0 only in the long run.

According to the long-run Phillips curve, if the Fed increases the growth rate of the money supply,
0 inflation and unemployment both rise.
0 inflation rises and unemployment falls.
0 only employment rises.
1 only inflation rises.

Which of the following policies would shift the long-run Phillips curve to the right?
0 Increased use of on-line vitas and job openings decrease the time people spend searching for jobs.
1 The government increases the minimum wage.
0 The government increases the money supply.
0 None of the above is correct.

Which of the following explanations for an upward sloping aggregate supply curve would imply an upward-sloping short-run Phillips curve?
0 misperceptions of relative prices
0 sticky wages and prices
1 Both a and b are correct.
0 None of the above is correct.

As compared to their initial values, which of the following variables are higher in both the short and long run if the government pursues an expansionary policy?
0 both unemployment and inflation
1 only inflation
0 only unemployment
0 neither unemployment nor inflation

Expansionary policy
0 increases unemployment and inflation in the short run, but only increases inflation in the long run.
0 increases unemployment and reduces inflation in the short run, but increases unemployment in the long run.
1 reduces unemployment in the short run, but increases inflation in the short run and long run.
0 reduces unemployment and inflation in the short run, but increases unemployment in the long run.

If expected inflation decreases the short-run Phillips curve shifts
0 right, so at any actual inflation rate, unemployment will be higher than before.
0 right, so at any actual inflation rate, unemployment will be lower than before.
0 left, so at any actual inflation rate, unemployment will be higher than before.
1 left, so at any actual inflation rate, unemployment will be lower than before.

In 1973, both unemployment and inflation were higher than they had been in 1969. This can be explained by monetary policy that increased
0 inflation expectations and so shifted the short-run Phillips curve to the right.
1 inflation expectations and so shifted the short-run Phillips curve to the left.
0 actual inflation and so shifted the long-run Phillips curve to the right.
0 actual inflation and so shifted the long-run Phillips curve to the left.

The Phillips curve would be shifted rightward by: 
0 a decline in inflationary expectations.
0 a decrease in oil prices.
1 an increase in inflationary expectations.
0 a leftward shift of aggregate demand.

The oil price shock of the 1970s shifted the short-run Phillips curve
0 right briefly because the Fed did not accommodate the oil price shock.
1 right for an extended period because the Fed accommodated the oil price shock.
0 left briefly because the Fed did not accommodate the oil price shock.
0 left for an extended period because the Fed accommodated the oil price shock.

Which of the following is a consequence of using monetary policy to fight unemployment created by a supply shock?
0 current inflation rises
0 the Phillips curve will not soon revert to its former position
1 Both a and b are correct.
0 Neither a nor b are correct.

Suppose that a small economy that depends mostly on agriculture experiences a year with exceptionally good conditions for growing crops. The effects of the good weather would shift
0 both short-run aggregate supply and the short-run Phillips curve right.
0 both short-run aggregate supply and the short-run Phillips curve left.
0 the short-run aggregate supply curve to the left, and the short-run Phillips curve to the right.
1 the short-run aggregate supply curve to the right, and the short-run Phillips curve to the left.

Suppose an economy with high inflation decides to decrease the money supply growth rate
0 both the current unemployment rate and the natural rate of unemployment fall.
0 both the current unemployment rate and the natural rate of unemployment rise.
1 the current rate of unemployment rises, but there is no change in the natural rate of unemployment.
0 the current rate of unemployment falls, but there is no change in the natural rate of unemployment.

Suppose the Fed decreased the growth rate of the money supply. Which of the following would permanently decrease?
0 both the unemployment rate and the inflation rate
0 the unemployment rate, but not the inflation rate
1 the inflation rate, but not the unemployment rate
0 neither the unemployment rate nor the inflation rate

The annual output of the United States is currently about $10 trillion. If the sacrifice ratio is 3 and the Fed pursues a monetary policy designed to decrease inflation 2 percentage points, what is the cost of reducing inflation?
0 $500 billion
1 $600 billion
0 $5 trillion
0 $6 trillion

If the government’s commitment to low inflation is credible, the sacrifice ratio is
0 high, so the cost of inflation reduction is high.
0 high, so the cost of inflation reduction is low.
0 low, so the cost of inflation reduction is high.
1 low, so the cost of inflation reduction is low.

The disinflation of the early 1980s was due to: 
1 restrictive monetary policies of the Federal Reserve.
0 expansionary monetary policies of the Federal Reserve.
0 restrictive fiscal policy.
0 expansionary fiscal policy.

Consider the following two sentences. Although the Volcker disinflation came at the cost of high unemployment, the cost was less than most economists predicted. The cost of the disinflation might have been even greater if people had believed that Volcker would really reduce inflation as much as he did.
0 Both sentences are true.
0 Neither sentence is true.
1 Only the first sentence is true.
0 Only the second sentence is true.

Which of the following is helpful in explaining levels of unemployment and inflation in the late 1990s?
0 Decreased inflation expectations shifted the short-run Phillips curve to the right.
1 The U.S. economy experienced some favorable supply shocks during this period.
0 Both of the above are correct.
0 None of the above is correct.

“Leaning against the wind” is exemplified by
0 a decrease in government expenditures when there is a recession.
1 an increase in the money supply when there is a recession.
0 a tax cut when there is an expansion.
0 None of the above is correct.

Those who desire that policymakers stabilize the economy would advocate which of the following when employment is above the natural rate?
0 increase the money supply
0 decrease taxes
1 decrease government expenditures
0 All of the above are correct.

In general, the longest lag for
1 fiscal policy is the time it takes to change policy, while for monetary policy the longest lag is the time it takes for policy to impact aggregate demand.
0 monetary policy is the time it takes to change policy, while for fiscal policy the longest lag is the time it takes for policy to impact aggregate demand.
0 both fiscal and monetary policy is the time it takes to change policy.
0 both fiscal and monetary policy is the time it takes for policy to impact aggregate demand.

The principal reason that monetary policy has lags is that it takes a long time for 
1 changes in the interest rate to change aggregate demand.
0 changes in the money supply to change interest rates.
0 the Fed to change the money supply.
0 None of the above is correct.

Opponents of using policy to stabilize the economy generally believe that 
0 unemployment and inflation are not cause for much concern.
0 neither fiscal nor monetary policy have much impact on aggregate demand.
1 attempts to stabilize the economy can increase the magnitude of economic fluctuations.
0 All of the above are correct.

The Federal Open Market Committee
0 is required to keep the interest rate within a range set by Congress.
1 operates with almost complete discretion over monetary policy.
0 is required to increase the money supply by a given growth rate each year.
0 is required by its charter to change the money supply using a complex formula that concerns the tradeoff between inflation and unemployment.

 The political business cycle refers to
0 changes in output associated with spending to pay for presidential campaigns.
0 changes in output created by the monetary rule the Fed must follow.
1 the potential for a central bank to increase the money supply, and so output, to help the incumbent president get re-elected.
0 the fact that about every four years some politician advocates greater government control of the Fed.

A law that requires the money supply to grow by a fixed percentage each year would eliminate
0 the time inconsistency problem, but not political business cycles.
0 the political business cycle, but not the time inconsistency problem.
1 both the time inconsistency problem and political business cycles.
0 neither the time inconsistency problem nor political business cycles.

	Which of the following is true concerning the recently developed inflation-targeting policy of Brazil’s central bank?
0 It is very different from policies used by Britain, Canada, and New Zealand.
0 Because the economy is easy to predict, they will not likely miss their inflation target.
0 If prices are rising faster than expected, the central bank is supposed to decrease interest rates.
1 The policy may not work well since the central bank is not free from political pressures.

Suppose that the central bank must follow a rule that requires it to increase the money supply when the price level falls and decrease the money supply when the price level rises. If the economy starts from long-run equilibrium and aggregate supply shifts right, the central bank must
0 decrease the money supply, which will move output back towards its long-run level.
0 decrease the money supply, which will move output further from its long-run level.
0 increase the money supply, which will move output back towards its long-run level.
1 increase the money supply, which will move output further from its long-run level.

A successful program to reduce inflation
1 eventually reduces inflation expectations.
0 permanently decreases output.
0 permanently raises interest rates.
0 All of the above are correct.

Proponents of zero inflation argue that reducing inflation has
0 permanent costs and temporary benefits.
1 temporary costs and permanent benefits.
0 permanent costs and benefits.
0 temporary costs and benefits.

The immediate consequences of Paul Volcker’s inflation reduction efforts were to
0 increase both inflation and unemployment.
0 reduce both inflation and unemployment.
0 increase inflation and reduce unemployment.
1 reduce inflation and increase unemployment.

Inflation reduction has the lowest cost when the efforts are
1 credible so that the sacrifice ratio is low.
0 unexpected so that the sacrifice ratio is low.
0 credible so that the sacrifice ratio is high.
0 unexpected so that the sacrifice ratio is high.

Some countries have had high inflation for a long time. Others have had low or moderate inflation for a long time. Which of the following, at least in theory, could explain why some countries would continue to have high inflation?
1 In a country where inflation has been high for a long time, people are likely to have found ways to limit the costs.
0 High inflation countries have relatively small sacrifice ratios and so see no need to reduce inflation.
0 Inflation reduction works best when it is unexpected, and people in high inflation countries would quickly anticipate any change in monetary policy.
0 All of the above are correct.

In the late 1990s, the U.S. government had a
0 deficit and a debt.
0 deficit, but no debt.
0 surplus, but no debt.
1 surplus and a debt.

Part of the argument for deficit reduction is that it would
0 increase interest rates and investment.
0 decrease interest rates and investment.
0 increase interest rates and decrease investment.
1 decrease interest rates and increase investment.

Proponents of debt reduction argue that the rise in government debt during the 1980s
0 can be justified since the United States was involved in major military conflicts.
1 was primarily the result of politicians finding it easier to raise expenditures than cut taxes.
0 can be justified since the United States went through serious recessions.
0 None of the above is correct.

Which of the following is true?
0 The current government debt is about $114,000 per person.
0 As long as the government debt grows faster than the nation’s income, there is nothing to prevent the government debt from growing forever.
1 If the government uses funds to pay for useful programs, on net the debt need not burden future generations.
0 When there is a deficit, there must also be a debt.

Suppose the budget deficit is rising 2 percent per year and nominal GDP is rising 4 percent per year, the debt created by these continuing deficits is 
0 sustainable, but the future burden on your children cannot be offset.
1 sustainable, and the future burden on your children can be offset if you save for them.
0 not sustainable, and the future burden on your children cannot be offset.
0 not sustainable, but the future burden on your children can be offset if you save for them.

Proponents of tax-law changes to encourage saving would
0 favor the use of means-tests for government benefits.
1 support a tax on consumption instead of on income.
0 favor all of the above programs.
0 favor none of the above programs.

IRA, 401(k), 403(b), and Keogh plans
0 are primarily useful to those saving to buy a home.
1 place limits on the amount people can deposit into these programs.
0 allow for unlimited withdrawals with no penalty.
0 All of the above are correct.

A lower rate of return on saving has
0 income and substitution effects that decrease saving.
0 income and substitution effects that increase saving.
0 an income effect that discourages saving and a substitution effect that encourages saving.
1 an income effect that encourages saving and a substitution effect that discourages saving.

A reduction in the tax rate on income from saving would 
1 increase real wages over time.
0 decrease the capital stock over time.
0 decrease productivity over time.
0 most directly benefit the poor in the short run.

The five debates over macroeconomic policy exist mostly because
0 economists disagree over basic issues such as the importance of saving for economic growth.
0 people fail to clearly see the benefits or the costs of most changes.
1 there are tradeoffs and people disagree about the best way to deal with them.
0 politicians offer misleading information.

If households and firms became more optimistic about the future real GDP
0 and unemployment would increase.
1 would increase and unemployment would decrease.
0 would decrease and unemployment would increase.
0 and unemployment would decrease.

If unemployment increases, which of the following could the government do to try to decrease it?
0 decrease the money supply
1 decrease taxes
0 decrease government expendtitures
0 None of the above would tend to decrease unemployment.

Which of the following actions would be considered leaning against the wind?
0 In response to a recession, the government leaves fiscal and monetary policy unchanged.
0 In response to a recession, the government decreases the money supply.
1 In response to a boom, the government increases taxes.
0 None of the above is correct.

In 1999 and 2000 the Federal Reserve raised interest rates several times. This policy implies the Fed
0 increased money supply growth due to concern about inflation.
0 increased money supply growth due to concern about unemployment.
1 decreased money supply growth due to concern about inflation.
0 decreased money supply growth due to concern about unemployment.

An increase in the money supply affects output primarily by
1 decreasing interest rates which increases business investment.
0 decreasing interest rates which decreases business investment.
0 increasing interest rates which increases business investment.
0 increasing interest rates which decreases business investment.

The principal lag in implementing fiscal policy is the time it takes
0 for firms to change output in response to the change in the price level.
0 for fiscal policy to affect interest rates.
0 for government expenditures and taxes to affect consumer spending.
1 to pass legislation to change expenditures or taxes.

The Federal Reserve 
1 has considerable discretion in determining monetary policy.
0 has little discretion, but not does not have to follow any specific rule.
0 must follow a monetary policy rule that requires it to be primarily concerned with inflation.
0 must follow a monetary policy rule that requires it to be primarily concerned with unemployment.

When the Fed has discretion, policy is time inconsistent which means inflation expectations are
1 higher and the short-run Phillips curve is further to the right than otherwise.
0 higher and the short-run Phillips curve is further to the left than otherwise.
0 lower and the short-run Phillips curve is further to the right than otherwise.
0 lower and the short-run Phillips curve is further to the left than otherwise.

Either a constant growth rate of the money supply monetary rule, or a rule requiring the Fed to respond to changes in real GDP would reduce or eliminate
0 the time inconsistency of monetary policy.
0 the monetary portion of the political business cycle.
1 both the time inconsistency of monetary policy and the monetary portion of the political business cycle.
0 neither the time inconsistency of monetary policy nor the monetary portion of the political business cycle.

Consider the following two sentences. If the Fed is bound by a rule to decrease the money supply when prices increase, then when aggregate supply shifts left, their actions will reduce output further. Paul Volcker’s monetary policy in 1979 caused a rise in Jimmy Carter’s popularity.
1 Only the first sentence is correct.
0 Only the second sentence is correct.
0 Both sentences are correct.
0 Neither sentence is correct.

An economist would be more likely to support a program reducing inflation to zero if she believed that 
0 shoeleather and menu costs were high.
0 Fed policy to reduce inflation was credible.
0 the short-run Phillips curve was steep.
1 All of the above are correct.

A policy to reduce inflation is likely to increase unemployment in
0 the short run and the long run.
1 the short run but not the long run.
0 the long run but not the short run.
0 neither the short nor long run.

If people believe a central bank’s intention to decrease the inflation rate, the
0 short-run Phillips curve shifts right.
1 short-run Phillips curve shifts left.
0 long-run Phillips curve shifts right.
0 long-run Phillips curve shifts left.

	If people in countries that have had persistently high inflation are skeptical of efforts to reduce inflation the short-run Phillips curve will remain far to the
0 right, and the sacrifice ratio will be low.
0 right, and the sacrifice ratio will be high.
0 left, and the sacrifice ratio will be low.
1 left, and the sacrifice ratio will be high.

Which of the following is incorrect?
0 A credible inflation reduction program can lead to a low sacrifice ratio.
1 Inflation reduction programs are likely to lower employment, but unlikely to have much impact on the capital stock.
0 Living standards depend on productivity and not the price level.
0 Rewriting the tax laws could reduce some of the current costs of inflation.

From 1980 to 1999 the debt of the U.S. federal government 
0 fell by about 80%.
0 fluctuated but ended up about the same.
0 rose by about 200%.
1 rose by about 400%.

Budget deficits reduce national saving causing real interest rates
0 and investment to fall.
0 and investment to rise.
1 to rise and investment to fall.
0 None of the above is correct.

Consider the following two sentences. A policy that required a balanced budget would require the government to either increase taxes or reduce expenditures during recessions, which would tend to worsen the recessions. Funding more education spending rather then reducing the government debt could, all things considered, make future generations better-off.
0 Only the first sentence is true.
0 Only the second sentence is true.
1 Both sentences are true.
0 Neither sentence is true.

Each person’s share of the government debt is about
1 2% of lifetime income.
0 10% of lifetime income.
0 25% of lifetime income.
0 40% of lifetime income.

Suppose that a country has a real GDP growth rate of about 1% per year and an inflation rate of about 3%. If they have nominal GDP of about 100 billion units of currency, they can have a deficit of about
0 2 billion without increasing the ratio of debt to income.
0 3 billion without increasing the ratio of debt to income.
1 4 billion without increasing the ratio of debt to income.
0 None of the above is correct.

Double taxation means that both
1 the profits of corporations and the dividends shareholders receive are taxed, which is currently the case in the United States.
0 the profits of corporations and the dividends shareholders receive are taxed, which is not currently the case in the United States.
0 wage income and interest income are taxed, which they currently are in the United States.
0 wage income and interest income are taxed, which is not currently the case in the United States.

U.S. public policy discourages saving because 
0 other things the same, taxes reduce the return from savings.
0 means tested programs such as Medicaid provide greater benefits to those who did not save.
0 at least some of the amount that parents bequest to their children is taxed.
1 All of the above are correct.

Assuming the substitution effect is large relative to the income effect, tax reform designed to increase saving,
0 decreases the interest rate and spending on capital goods.
1 decreases the interest rate and increases spending on capital goods.
0 increases the interest rate and decreases spending on capital goods.
0 increases the interest rate and increases spending on capital goods.

Tax changes that reduce taxes on interest and capital income may lower tax revenues which
0 increases public saving and so increases national saving.
0 increases public saving and so decreases national saving.
0 decreases public saving and so increases national saving.
1 decreases public saving and so decreases national saving.

Which of the following is incorrect?
0 Any tax change that favors people who save, tends to favor people with high income.
1 If saving were relatively elastic with respect to tax rates, a decrease in the tax rate on income from saving may not change saving very much.
0 A higher return from saving raises saving if the substitution effect is larger than the income effect.
0 Other things the same an increase in government surpluses would increase both public and national saving.
