There is a tremendous gap between youth and the elderly in all of the following EXCEPT
0 political knowledge.
0 political participation.
0 political interest.
1 volunteering.
0 media use. 

Political knowledge
0 is greater among youth than the elderly.
1 fosters political tolerance.
0 is not that important in a democracy.
0 is generally high in the United States.
0 none of the above 

Voter turnout matters because
0 federal funds are allocated on the basis of the number of voters in a congressional district.
0 better candidates are selected when more people vote.
1 politicians pay more attention to those who vote than to those who do not vote.
0 it makes citizens feel better.
0 it makes our country look better. 

Government is defined as the
0 organization that brings problems to the attention of public officials.
0 body that is concerned with economic problems while leaving social problems to other institutions of society.
0 agency that implements policies that have been enacted by other institutions of the political system.
0 executive branch and its agencies.
1 institutions and processes through which public policies are made for society. 

The policymaking institutions of the American national government include all of thefollowing EXCEPT
0 the Supreme Court.
0 the presidency.
1 political parties.
0 Congress.
0 the Senate. 

One advantage of the Internet for democracy is that it
0 provides less information than newspapers.
0 makes it easy to avoid political topics.
1 makes it easier for citizens to communicate directly with government.
0 will provide more political information to political elites.
0 none of the above 

Things that are indivisible, nonexclusive, and that everyone can share are called
0 intangible property.
0 socialized.
0 community property.
0 communist.
1 public goods. 

Governments in the modern world, whether democratic or not, are similar in doing all of thefollowing EXCEPT
1 protecting citizens ¹ civil liberties.
0 maintaining a national defense.
0 providing public goods.
0 collecting taxes.
0 providing public services. 

A public good is defined as
1 something in which any member of society can share.
0 something provided by the government that cannot be provided by the private sector.
0 a choice that government makes in response to a political issue.
0 a public policy that is good for the nation as a whole.
0 all of the above 

Which of the following statements about public goods is FALSE?
0 The government usually provides public goods.
0 Public goods are things that everyone can share.
1 Individuals have powerful incentives to provide public goods.
0 Public goods are not profitable.
0 Public goods are indivisible and nonexclusive. 

All governments
1 provide public goods and socialize citizens into the political and social system.
0 ensure safety on the high seas and promote free enterprise.
0 maintain national parks and a national defense.
0 guarantee a capitalist economy and collect taxes.
0 hold elections. 

All governments
0 have written constitutions.
0 are elected.
0 have a legislature.
1 provide services.
0 have a president. 

Which of the following statements about taxes is TRUE?
1 One out of every three dollars earned by an American citizen is used to pay taxes.
0 Despite the image presented by the media, survey data reveal that Americans feel they are getting their money's worth for the taxes they pay.
0 About one-tenth of the average American citizen's salary goes to taxes.
0 The tax burden in the United States is higher than in most other democratic nations.
0 All of these are true. 

An interest group so single-minded that its members often vote on only one issue, ignoring apolitician's stand on everything else, is known as
0 a one-issue group.
0 a uni-issue group.
0 a hot-button group.
1 a single-issue group.
0 a mono-issue group. 

When compared with the rest of the world, America has a relatively low
0 number of offices up for election.
0 number of candidates who seek office.
0 frequency of elections.
1 voter turnout in elections.
0 all of the above 

Many politicians believe that single-issue groups
0 stimulate the political system to solve public policy problems.
0 are essential to democracy.
1 complicate efforts to seek the middle ground on various issues.
0 play a unifying role in American politics.
0 do not affect policymaking. 

Politics is defined by Harold Lasswell as
0 conflict in society.
0 the exercise of power.
0 the resolution of conflict in a way that serves the public.
1 who gets what, when, and how.
0 a course of action to solve a problem. 

Single-issue groups
0 are rapidly losing prominence in American politics.
0 usually run their own candidates for public office.
1 have little sympathy for compromising.
0 help facilitate the construction of a cohesive national public policy.
0 are highly regarded by political scientists for their contributions to democracy. 

Which of the following statements best describes voter turnout in the United States?
0 Among democratic nations, the United States leads the world in voter turnout.
0 Voter turnout in the United States is constitutionally mandated.
0 Voters are usually a microcosm of the entire body of American citizens.
0 Most American voters consider politics as critical to their interests.
1 The United States has one of the lowest voter turnout rates in the world. 

The list of problems to which political leaders are paying serious attention is a(n)
0 problem set.
1 policy agenda.
0 issue constellation.
0 legislative package.
0 none of the above 

________ is the process by which policy comes into being and evolves over time.
0 Democracy
1 A policymaking system
0 A constellation
0 The bureaucracy
0 Government 

The process from above is
1 a policymaking system.
0 political decision making.
0 a policy agenda.
0 a government.
0 a linkage institution. 

An example of public policymaking would be
1 Congress and the president deciding not to act on the AIDS crisis.
0 a majority of the public supporting the idea of government dealing with unemployment.
0 the president meeting with the heads of oil companies.
0 the press creating public concern about racial discrimination.
0 all of the above 

All of the following are parts of the policymaking system EXCEPT
1 public goods.
0 policymaking institutions.
0 linkage institutions.
0 people's political interests.
0 policy. 

Which of the following statements about a government's policy agenda is FALSE?
0 When you vote, you are partly looking at whether a candidate shares your agenda or not.
0 Bad news gets an issue on the policy agenda more quickly than good news.
0 When people confront government officials with problems to be solved, they are trying to influence the government's policy agenda.
1 A government's policy agenda tends to remain constant over time.
0 None of the above; all are true. 

A political party is a key ________ in America¹s democratic system.
0 stimulus-response
1 linkage institution
0 input
0 majoritarian inhibitor
0 output 

In a democratic society, parties, elections, interest groups and the media are all examples of ________ between the preferences of citizens and the government's policy agenda.
0 cross-pollination
0 inputs and outputs
0 ideological bridges
0 obstacles
1 linkage institutions 

Which of the following is NOT a linkage institution?
0 political parties
0 the media
0 interest groups
1 Congress
0 All of these are linkage institutions. 

Which of these is a linkage institution?
1 USA Today
0 the president's cabinet
0 the House of Representatives
0 the ambassador to France
0 all of the above 

Parties and interest groups
0 determine which issues are on the policy agenda.
0 are not particularly interested in the policy agenda.
1 work hard to get the issues they want on the policy agenda.
0 have no effect on the policy agenda.
0 determine the congressional agenda. 

A choice that government makes in response to some issue on its agenda is called
1 public policy.
0 selective selection.
0 a law.
0 stimulus-response.
0 rational choice theory. 

________ arise when people disagree about a problem or a public policy choice made tocombat a problem.
0 Revolutions
1 Political issues
0 Social crises
0 Governments
0 Wars 

A key question that confronts government regarding different public policy choices is
0 whether an appropriate linkage institution is willing to frame a policy.
0 which is the most complicated one to deal with.
0 which is the least complicated one to deal with.
1 whether or not government should do anything about them.
0 all of the above 

Public policy is defined as a
0 policy directed at more than one person.
0 course of action to solve a problem.
0 set of rules and regulations issued by a government agency.
0 course of action by a political party.
1 choice that government makes in response to an issue. 

Political issues
0 are always acted upon by the government.
1 arise when people disagree about a problem or public policy choices made to combat a problem.
0 are limited in number in the United States.
0 usually emerge out of group consensus on a problem.
0 all of the above 

Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels published
1 The Communist Manifesto.
0 A Theory of Democracy.
0 The Federalist Papers.
0 Poor Richard's Almanac.
0 War and Peace. 

One type of linkage institution is
1 an interest group.
0 a government.
0 a bureaucracy.
0 a legislature.
0 all of the above 

The effects a policy has on people and problems is called
0 policy outputs.
0 policy implementation.
0 policy issues.
1 policy impacts.
0 policy agenda. 

The writers of the United States Constitution
1 were distrustful of democracy.
0 sought to establish the most democratic system they could.
0 were interested in promoting equality above all else.
0 patterned our government after Britain's except for the King.
0 believed in majority rule. 

A means of selecting policymakers and or organizing government so that policy representsand responds to the public's preferences is
0 government.
0 politics.
0 public administration.
1 democracy.
0 all of the above 

Which of these is NOT a criterion of traditional democratic theory, as formulated by RobertDahl?
0 freedom of speech and press
0 One person gets one vote.
0 Citizenship must be open to all within a nation.
0 Those who participate in political organizations must be representative of the general population.
1 Citizens must make rational choices. 

Which of the following is NOT one of the cornerstones of an ideal democracy?
0 a constitution
0 effective participation
0 citizen control of the agenda
1 economic equality
0 equality in voting 

Two of the most important principles of democratic theory are majority rule and
0 the plurality rule.
0 judicial review.
1 minority rights.
0 majority restraint.
0 Roberts ¹ Rules of Order. 

Which of the following takes the most positive view of democracy in the United States?
0 democratic centralism
1 pluralist theory
0 hyperpluralism
0 democratic positivism
0 elite theory 


All of the following are ingredients of a pluralistic democracy EXCEPT
0 group competition for policy benefits.
0 bargaining and compromise.
1 majority rule.
0 multiple access points to policymakers.
0 separation of powers. 

The most fundamental element of democratic theory is
0   power to the people!  
0 government efficiency.
0 equality.
1 majority rule.
0 access to information. 

Representation refers to
0 majority rule.
0 all policy views being included in political debate.
0 the protection of minority rights in a pluralist system.
0 electing office-holders in fair and free elections.
1 the correspondence between the few leaders and the many followers in a democracy. 

Which of the following individuals have suggested that pluralist theory is less descriptive ofAmerican politics than in the past?
0 Anthony King
0 Robert Dahl
0 Alexis de Tocqueville
1 Robert Putnam
0 Thomas Jefferson 

American government is viewed most positively by the
0 socialist theory.
1 pluralist theory.
0 positivist philosophy.
0 hyperpluralist theory.
0 elite and class theory. 

A system in which many groups make themselves heard and felt somewhere in the policyprocess is
1 pluralistic.
0 direct democracy.
0 hyperpluralistic.
0 elitist.
0 bureaucratic. 

The theory that argues that group competition results in a rough approximation of the publicinterest in public policy is
0 hyperpluralist theory.
0 balance of power theory.
0 elite and class theory.
1 pluralist theory.
0 bureaucratic theory. 

Which of the following is NOT a contemporary theory of democracy?
0 hyperpluralism
0 class theory
1 democratic centralism
0 pluralism
0 elite theory 

Robert Putnam's claim that Americans are now   bowling alone   is a criticism of
1 pluralism.
0 elite theory.
0 hyperpluralism.
0 social network theory.
0 none of the above 

Which of the following is most fundamentally critical of American democracy?
0 traditional democratic theory
0 democratic negativism
0 pluralist theory
0 critical democratic theory
1 elite and class theory 

Many elite and class theorists believe that ________ of Americans control most governmentpolicy decisions.
0 5 percent
0 a majority
0 the vast middle class
1 1 percent
0 10 percent 

Over a third of America's wealth is owned by
0 the United States government.
1 one percent of the population.
0 a third of the population.
0 seven percent of the population.
0 Japanese investors. 

At the center of all theories of elite domination of politics is
1 big business.
0 the Congress.
0 the nouveau riche.
0 the Trilateral Commission.
0 the president. 

Elite and class theory holds that
1 all societies are divided along class lines and that an upper-class elite will rule.
0 power is dispersed among many institutions.
0 in a democracy the majority class must overthrow the government and rule by itself if government is to be freed from the control of the rich.
0 there is little consensus in policymaking among elites.
0 politics is the basis of elite power. 

The theory that sees wealth as the basis of power is the
0 democratic theory.
0 hyperpluralist theory.
0 Jeffersonian theory.
1 elite and class theory.
0 pluralist theory. 

Hyperpluralists believe that the dominant player in American politics is
1 groups.
0 the president.
0 the government.
0 the media.
0 rich individuals. 

In evaluating American democracy, hyperpluralists
0 claim that competing groups vying for power make for generally efficient, honest government.
0 claim that society is governed solely by an upper-class elite.
1 claim that too many influential groups cripple government's ability to govern.
0 believe that the public interest is nearly always translated into public policy in the United States.
0 none of the above 

According to hyperpluralists, the increasing caseloads of federal and state courts demonstrate
0 the high status of attorneys in the United States.
0 the inability to control the bureaucracy in implementing policy.
0 that groups are more likely to appeal to different institutions in order to gain policy benefits.
1 the expanding scope of government in the United States.
0 the increasing complexity of our social networks. 

The   power of the few   in the United States today is likely to refer to
0 high-level bureaucrats.
0 elected officials.
0 property holders.
1 technical experts.
0 a silent majority. 

The nature of groups and the government in hyperpluralist theory is
0 strong government and strong groups.
0 weak groups and strong government.
0 weak groups, strong elites, and weak government.
1 strong groups and weak government.
0 too few groups result in the creation of many governments. 

Hyperpluralists would argue that
1 too many influential groups cripple government's ability to govern.
0 society is divided along class lines.
0 group competition will result in a rough approximation of the public interest.
0 wealth is the basis of power.
0 too few groups lead to a proliferation of governments. 

Which of these is NOT considered a challenge to democracy by the textbook?
0 the diversity of the American people
0 the level of political participation by Americans
0 PACs
0 the specialization of knowledge held by experts
1 the tendency of the American political system to change rapidly 

Which of the following would NOT be considered a contemporary challenge to Americandemocracy?
0 complexity of the issues
1 the threat of communism
0 the use of money in politics
0 political participation rates
0 diversity 

Increased technical expertise is a challenge to democracy because
0 it is difficult to have an informed   non-technical   public debate on technical issues.
1 it goes against the tenets of pluralist political theory.
0 it violates the notion of one man, one vote.
0 elected officials find it hard to understand technical experts.
0 interest groups have a difficult time securing technical expertise. 

PAC stands for
0 Partisan Assistance Contribution.
0 Party Affairs Council.
0 Policy Advisory Commission.
0 Politically Active Constituency.
1 Political Action Committee. 

People who worry about PACs are most especially concerned about
0 the decline in American voter turnout.
1 the close connection between money and politics.
0 too much democracy being dangerous to social stability.
0 the role Party Affairs Councils play in elections.
0 single-issue voters. 

Escalating campaign costs are a challenge to democracy because
1 it is believed that PAC contributions affect the way members of Congress vote on single issues.
0 they are associated with more technical policies.
0 they lead to policy gridlock.
0 they reflect diverse interests.
0 they make it easier for candidates to raise money. 

According to the text, the diversity of political interests in America is resulting in
0 a decrease in political participation.
1 policy gridlock.
0 the breakdown of the educational system.
0 an increase in political participation.
0 a cultural renaissance. 

The ability of groups to prevent the government from taking actions adverse to their interestsleads to what the text calls
0 Dahl's   ideal democratic process.  
0 elite dominance.
0 budget deficits.
0 enlightened understanding.
1 policy gridlock. 

The overall set of shared values in a society is known as
0 individualism.
0 value added voting.
0 populism.
1 political culture.
0 collectivism. 

According to G.K. Chesterston, the United States is the only country in the world that isfounded on
0 heredity.
1 a creed.
0 isolationism.
0 civic virtue.
0 religious principles. 

During the American Revolution, Patrick Henry said
0   We fight for truth, justice, and the American way!  
1   Give me liberty or give me death.  
0   I regret that I have but one life to give for my country.  
0   Our fathers brought forth on this continent, a new nation, conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.  
0   Live free or die.   

According to Thomas Jefferson, which of the following is an inalienable right?
1 Liberty
0 Taxes
0 Justice
0 Jurisprudence
0 Incontinence 

The Declaration of Independence says that   all men are created equal.   Which aspect of theAmerican creed does this suggest?
0 Individualism
0 Egalitarianism
1 Liberty
0 Capitalism
0 Populism 

One of the primary reasons for the comparatively small scope of American government is
0 liberalism.
0 pluralism.
0 judicial review.
0 capitalism.
1 individualism. 

According to Frederick Jackson Turner, the existence of the frontier in American history mostdirectly resulted in
0 the abolition of slavery.
1 a strong preference for limited government.
0 the environmental movement.
0 the space program.
0 the civil rights movement. 

Populism emphasizes
1 the people.
0 the elected officials.
0 representative democracy.
0 the meritocracy.
0 prosperity. 

Those who argue that the United States is in the midst of a culture war argue that Americansare becoming increasingly
0 isolationist.
0 secular.
0 hypocritical.
0 egalitarian.
1 polarized. 

National, state, and local governments in America spend almost ________ of the grossdomestic product.
0 3 percent
1 30 percent
0 all
0 10 percent
0 none 

The United States government owns ________ of the land in the United States
0 all
0 5 percent
1 one-third
0 2 percent
0 none 

The largest item in the United States government budget, consuming more than one -fifth ofspending, is
1 Social Security payments.
0 foreign aid.
0 education spending.
0 national defense.
0 welfare for the poor. 

The United States national government spends about ________ a year.
0 $4 billion
0 $250 billion
0 $1,000,000,000,000
0 $500 billion
1 $2.8 trillion 

Which of the following categories is the largest expenditure in the federal budget?
1 Social Security
0 Medicaid
0 environment
0 national defense
0 homeland security 

Which of these is TRUE about the United States Constitution?
0 It centralizes political power.
0 It is superseded only by decrees of the president.
0 It sets neutral rules for the game of politics.
0 All of these are true.
1 None of these are true. 

In setting the broad rules of the game of politics, constitutions
1 are never neutral; they give some participants advantages over others.
0 are fair and impartial.
0 allow all participants the same political opportunities.
0 have no effect on the distribution of power in society.
0 are constantly changing. 

By eighteenth-century standards, life was ________ for most people in the United States at thetime of the Revolution.
0 hell both politically and economically
0 politically oppressive
0 ideal
1 not bad
0 an economic nightmare 

The British government stepped up its controls over the American colonies with new taxesand stronger commerce regulations right after
0 King Phillip's War.
0 the assassination of the Duke of Windsor.
0 King George's War.
0 the Civil War.
1 the French and Indian War. 


The British levied new taxes on its North American colonies in the eighteenth century in orderto pay for
0 maintaining the elegant lifestyle of the British royalty.
0 conquest of territories in Africa and Asia.
1 defending new territories obtained after the French and Indian War.
0 tax cuts and social welfare programs for residents of the British Isles.
0 the rising cost of tea. 

Who issued the Declaration of Independence?
0 the Constitutional Convention of 1776
1 the Continental Congress
0 President George Washington
0 the 13 colonial legislatures
0 General George Washington 


The Declaration of Independence was primarily
0 a treaty with France for war against Britain.
0 an original philosophical treatise on politics.
0 an outline for a new government.
1 a polemic, announcing and justifying a revolution.
0 the United States ¹ first constitution. 

The primary author of the Declaration of Independence was
1 Thomas Jefferson.
0 Benjamin Franklin.
0 James Madison.
0 King George III.
0 George Washington. 

The Declaration of Independence
0 contained completely new ideas on political philosophy.
1 became one of the most important statements of American political philosophy.
0 took several months to write.
0 blamed the British parliament for abuses on the colonies.
0 all of the above 

The American Revolution was based upon the ideas of
0 intellectual slaves.
0 intellectual frontiersmen.
0 George Washington.
1 European political thinkers.
0 American farmers. 

The foundation of John Locke's philosophy was that human beings
1 derive their rights from nature.
0 have rights that are granted them by government.
0 determine their own rights.
0 derive their rights from God.
0 are granted their rights by their King. 

Which of these was NOT among John Locke's key philosophical concepts?
1 checks and balances
0 limited government
0 natural rights
0 consent of the governed
0 property rights 

John Locke's ideas on natural rights were related to human law in that
0 natural rights were less important than human law.
1 natural rights were considered higher than human law.
0 human law was the source of natural rights.
0 human law protected property rights, making human law equal to natural rights.
0 human law and natural rights were unimportant after revolution. 

John Locke believed in each of the following EXCEPT
0 limited government.
0 consent of the governed.
0 natural rights.
1 divine right of kings.
0 both C and D 

The Declaration of Independence argued that
0 nations are indivisible and a people must never secede from their mother nation.
1 people should revolt when they suffer deep injustices.
0 the British parliament was to blame for the evils imposed upon the colonists.
0 people should always work peacefully within the system to redress any grievances they have.
0 revolution is justifiable whenever people become angry with their government. 

Reflecting the natural rights philosophy, the Declaration of Independence stated thatgovernments derive their just powers from
0 God.
1 the consent of the governed.
0 tradition.
0 their elected leaders.
0 a Constitution. 

The justification for separation from England in the Declaration of Independence was basedheavily on the ideas of the English philosopher
0 Lord North.
0 Henry VIII.
0 Oliver Cromwell.
0 David Hume.
1 John Locke. 

The sole purpose of government, according to John Locke, was to
0 promote the common good.
0 prevent anarchy.
0 educate its people.
0 protect individuals from violence.
1 protect natural rights. 

John Locke believed that the   end of government   was
1 preservation of property.
0 majority rule.
0 equality of man.
0 pursuit of happiness.
0   the beginning of life.   

In John Locke's philosophy, the requirements that standing laws be known and privateproperty be preserved
0 are always threatened by democratic government.
1 impose two major limits on government.
0 are unenforceable when government is limited.
0 must be sacrificed in the interest of democracy.
0 could only be enforced by a powerful king. 


Thomas Jefferson's phrase   life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness   was a modification ofJohn Locke's phrase   Life, liberty, and ________.  
1 property
0 God
0 heaven
0 health
0 equality 


The primary goal of the American Revolution was
0 to gain control over the colonies ¹ trade with foreign nations.
0 to cut taxes.
0 to win the right to print paper money that could be used to pay off debts.
1 to restore the colonists ¹ rights as British subjects.
0 to gain control of the western frontier. 

The American Revolution was different from the French, Russian, and Iranian revolutions inthat
0 it was much bloodier.
0 it was much shorter.
0 it did not result in a change of government.
1 it produced little societal change.
0 It was different in all these ways. 

The Articles of Confederation were adopted by
1 the Continental Congress.
0 President George Washington.
0 a small, self-appointed committee of the nation's political leaders.
0 the British Parliament.
0 the Continental Army under command of General George Washington. 

Beginning in 1781, the United States was governed under the
1 Articles of Confederation.
0 Mayflower Compact.
0 Basic Law of 1781.
0 British Constitution.
0 current United States Constitution. 

The primary goal of the American Revolution was to
0 establish a new political system.
1 restore rights the colonists felt were already theirs as British subjects.
0 create a new economic order.
0 institutionalize new social values based on equality.
0 establish property rights. 

The American Revolution
1 did not drastically alter the colonists ¹ way of life.
0 produced great societal change.
0 was won quickly and decisively by the superior American troops.
0 created class conflicts that split society.
0 was fought between a large army of colonials and a small British army. 

Under the Articles of Confederation, most power rested with the
0 the British Parliament.
0 president.
0 United States Senate.
1 state legislatures.
0 Continental Congress. 

Which of the following is FALSE about the United States government under the Articles ofConfederation?
0 Each state had only one vote in Congress.
1 Most authority rested with the United States Congress rather than the state governments.
0 The Congress had only one house.
0 There was no president.
0 All of these are false. 


After the Revolution, power in the state legislatures shifted
0 from merchants to lawyers.
0 from the poor to the wealthy.
0 from radicals to conservatives.
1 from the wealthy to those with more moderate incomes.
0 from the upper to the lower chambers. 

The United States government under the Articles of Confederation can best be described as
1 weak and ineffective.
0 overly prone to intervention in foreign affairs.
0 overly bureaucratic.
0 dictatorial.
0 a personal tool of George Washington. 

Which of the following was NOT a source of revenue for the United States government underthe Articles of Confederation?
1 taxes levied by the Continental Congress
0 printing its own money
0 selling off western lands
0 state governments
0 All of the above were revenue sources. 

Which of the following was NOT a problem with the national government under the Articlesof Confederation?
0 the unwillingness of the states to send money requisitioned by the central national government
0 the lack of an executive to lead the nation
1 the lack of power given to state legislatures
0 the inability of the central national government to regulate foreign trade or regulate the national economy
0 None of these were problems at the time. 

Under the Articles of Confederation most governmental power rested in
1 the state governments.
0 the national government.
0 the president.
0 the Congress.
0 all of the above 

After the Revolution, a major power shift occurred in the states from ________ to ________.
0 the broad middle class; a handful of wealthy individuals
0 countryside; city
0 city; countryside
0 the east coast; the western interior
1 wealthy individuals; broad middle class 

After the American Revolution, state legislatures were composed of
1 significantly more middle-class representatives and fewer wealthy members compared to before the war.
0 revolutionary war militiamen.
0 about the same ratio of wealthy members and not so wealthy members as before the war.
0 significantly more landless laborers and poor farmers than any other group.
0 a higher percentage of wealthy planters, lawyers, and merchants than ever before. 

Right after the Revolutionary War, a dramatic change swept through the new countryresulting in
1 a dramatic increase in democracy and freedom.
0 a population shift from the cities to the country.
0 a population shift from country to city.
0 an explosion in prosperity.
0 full-scale industrialization. 

Under the Articles of Confederation, Congress had the power to
0 levy taxes.
0 overturn state laws.
0 regulate commerce.
1 maintain an army and navy.
0 all of the above 

Which of the following was NOT occurring in the states during the time of the Articles ofConfederation?
0 abolishment of religious qualifications for holding office
0 adoption of bills of rights
1 upper-class dominance
0 expanded political participation
0 all of the above 

Under the Articles of Confederation, power in the states began to shift to the hands of
0 merchants and lawyers.
1 middle-class farmers and craft workers.
0 governors.
0 low-income landowners.
0 new industrialists. 

In post-Revolutionary America, state governors were often selected by
0 judges.
0 the president.
0 heredity.
0 the people directly.
1 state legislatures. 

At the end of the Revolutionary War,
0 captured British troops were herded into large prison camps where they served life sentences for their treachery.
0 a strong, new national government began immediately to keep the economy running smoothly with careful regulation.
1 a postwar depression severely hurt small farmers and many others.
0 the condition of the economy was largely the same as it had been before the war.
0 a period of tremendous economic prosperity began. 

A small band of farmers in western Massachusetts took up arms in what is remembered as
0 the Farmers ¹ Revolt.
0 King George's War.
0 the Boston Tea Party.
0 the Whiskey Rebellion.
1 Shays ¹ Rebellion. 

After the Revolution, James Madison observed that   the most common and durable source offaction has been
0 urban and rural divisions.  
1 the various and unequal divisions of property.  
0 aristocracy.  
0 the British army.  
0 racial inequalities.   

At the top of the political agenda during the period of the Articles of Confederation was
1 economic issues.
0 social-equality issues.
0 military issues.
0 voting rights issues.
0 slavery. 

Among the factors that contributed to economic turmoil under the Articles of Confederationwas the
1 postwar depression that left many small farmers unable to pay their debts and threatened mortgage foreclosures.
0 decreasing economic viability of slavery.
0 power shift from middle-class farmers to wealthy landowners.
0 state legislatures that favored creditors and created more debt.
0 All of these factors contributed to the economic turmoil. 

Shays ¹ Rebellion was
0 the most decisive battle of the Revolution, after which British troops were never again able to mount a major offensive against American troops.
0 a slave uprising in Virginia.
0 an uprising by small merchants demanding credit.
0 an uprising by Revolutionary War veterans demanding pensions.
1 an uprising by farmers to prevent judges from foreclosing on farms. 

Which state boycotted the Constitutional Convention?
0 Texas, because it took too long to get to Philadelphia
0 Virginia
1 Rhode Island
0 No state boycotted.
0 Both Virginia and Rhode Island boycotted. 

What was the significance of the Annapolis meeting?
0 It was the first national convention of women demanding the right to vote.
0 It issued the Declaration of Independence.
0 It dissolved the Continental Congress.
0 It selected George Washington as the first post-Revolutionary president.
1 It issued the original call for the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia. 

In Annapolis, Maryland, in 1786, delegates from five states met to discuss
1 the problems of the national government under the Articles of Confederation.
0 the need to declare independence from England.
0 the need for a Bill of Rights.
0 the issue of slavery.
0 all of the above 

Those who met at the Constitutional Convention in 1787 were
0 a mix of wealthy and middle-class Americans.
1 wealthy planters, lawyers, and merchants.
0 overwhelmingly middle-class farmers.
0 primarily British officials overseeing the implementation of the new government agreed to in the peace treaty.
0 split evenly between Democrats and Republicans. 

What was the original, sole, and express purpose of the convention in Philadelphia?
1 to revise the Articles of Confederation
0 to choose the first president
0 to negotiate the peace treaty with Great Britain
0 to abolish the Articles of Confederation
0 to grant women the right to vote 

Which of the following was NOT a characteristic of the 55 delegates who attended theConstitutional Convention?
1 Most were residents of the western frontiers.
0 They were all men.
0 A significant number were urbanites.
0 Many were college graduates.
0 They were mostly wealthy planters. 

The first two weeks of the Constitutional Convention were spent debating
1 the nature of republican government.
0 the economic structure of the new government.
0 the terms of Britain's surrender.
0 military issues and the need for a standing army.
0 practical political issues. 


According to James Madison and many of the delegates at the Constitutional Convention,what is the primary source of political conflict?
0 ignorance
0 stupidity
0 emotions
0 religious beliefs
1 unequal distribution of wealth 

Most of the delegates at the Constitutional Convention regarded what as the greatest threat togovernment?
1 factions
0 kings
0 slaves
0 foreign adversaries
0 charismatic leaders 

The view of human nature most prevalent among the Founding Fathers was that
0 men abhor power and the burdens that come with it.
1 people are self-interested in acquiring wealth and power.
0 human nature can be perfected, given the right social and political institutions.
0 people are basically cooperative and community-oriented.
0 people are disorganized and without vision. 

Delegates to the Constitutional Convention generally agreed on each of the following EXCEPT
0 questions of human nature.
0 the need for a limited government.
0 the object and nature of a republican government.
0 causes of political conflict.
1 issues of equality. 

The Founding Fathers believed that a major source of political conflict was the
0 government's attempt to preserve private property.
0 absence of majority rule.
1 unequal distribution of property.
0 religious differences in society.
0 Indian tribes. 

The ________, offered as a proposal at the Constitutional Convention, called for each state tobe equally represented in Congress.
0 Equal Rights Amendment (ERA)
1 New Jersey Plan
0 Connecticut Compromise
0 three-fifths compromise
0 Virginia Plan 

Most delegates to the Constitutional Convention believed that the secret of good governmentis a
0 centralized government.
1 balanced government.
0 government that is open and not secretive.
0 popularly controlled government.
0 strong executive. 

The Virginia and New Jersey Plans introduced at the Constitutional Convention differedmainly over whether
1 states should send equal numbers of representatives to Congress.
0 there should be a president.
0 the states or the national government should regulate interstate commerce.
0 there should be a legislative branch at the national level.
0 slavery should be permitted in the country. 

Which of these was NOT one of the big three disagreements at the Constitutional Convention?
0 what to do about slavery
0 who should have the right to vote
0 whether or not the states should have an equal number of votes in Congress
1 whether the courts should have the power of judicial review
0 issues of equality 

According to the Constitution, each state was entitled to how many senators?
0 as many as it wanted to send
0 none
0 one
0 It depended on the state's population.
1 two 

As originally established by the Constitution, the House of Representatives had how manymembers from each state?
0 seven
0 one
0 two
1 It depended on the state's population.
0 none 

At the time of the constitutional convention, slavery
0 existed only in Georgia and the Carolinas.
0 was permitted in all thirteen states.
1 was illegal only in Massachusetts.
0 was prohibited north of the Mason-Dixon line.
0 was prohibited by the Connecticut Compromise, which was never put into effect. 

The Connecticut Compromise at the Constitutional Convention
1 resolved the impasse between those who favored the New Jersey Plan and those who preferred the Virginia Plan.
0 added the Bill of Rights to the Constitution in order to lessen concerns about too much power for the new government.
0 settled the dispute over whether slavery should be allowed in the final constitution.
0 threw out the idea of having a monarchy in the United States, opting instead for an indirectly elected president.
0 involved all of these elements. 

The Constitutional Convention dealt with slavery by
0 prohibiting it only north of the Mason-Dixon line.
1 recognizing it by providing for the return of escaped slaves.
0 prohibiting it after twenty years.
0 counting the slaves as a full part of the population for the purposes of representation in the House.
0 emancipating slaves on the principle of equality. 


In determining congressional representation and taxation, the Constitution
1 counted slaves as three-fifths of a person.
0 did not count slaves.
0 counted slaves the same as free persons.
0 was silent on the issue of how slaves would be counted, instead leaving the issue to each state to decide.
0 counted slaves as one-half of a person. 

Regarding the right to vote in national elections, the framers of the Constitution
0 required that all free, adult males with property worth at least $50 be allowed to vote.
1 decided to leave it up to the individual states to determine voter qualifications in their own states.
0 finally granted women the right to vote.
0 included a requirement that all free, adult males be allowed to vote.
0 provided that free men and women over the age of 20 be allowed to vote. 

Which of the following was NOT one of the economic difficulties the writers of theConstitution attempted to address?
0 some states kept printing virtually worthless money
0 the tariffs states had erected against one another to protect their state-made products
1 lack of unemployment compensation and welfare payments
0 the difficulty of the Continental Congress in raising money from the states
0 All of these were dealt with in the Constitution. 

The debate at the Philadelphia Convention over eligibility to vote was resolved by
0 allowing all males, but no females to vote.
0 requiring voter registration before one would be eligible to vote.
0 requiring universal manhood suffrage.
1 leaving it up to the individual states.
0 permitting all citizens over 21 to vote. 

A major purpose of the economic provisions in the Constitution was to
0 promote a more equal distribution of wealth in the country.
0 guarantee the states a significant economic role.
0 preserve and strengthen the farm economy to the disadvantage of manufacturing.
0 establish a comprehensive set of social welfare programs to assist people in times of need.
1 create a strong national government so as to bring stability out of economic chaos. 

Which of the following situations was NOT considered an economic problem by the writers ofthe Constitution?
0 States put up tariffs against products from other states.
0 Paper money was virtually worthless in some states.
0 The economy was in a recession.
0 States were passing laws favoring debtors over creditors.
1 National taxes were too high. 

Compared to the government under the Articles of Confederation, the Constitution gave thecentral government
0 far fewer powers.
0 total control of the economy.
0 about the same economic powers.
1 more economic powers.
0 almost no economic powers. 

In order to put the national economy on sound footing, the Constitution obligated the newgovernment to ________ all the government debts incurred under the Continental Congress.
0 forgive
0 renegotiate at lower interest rates
0 renegotiate at higher interest rates
1 repay
0 negate 

The framers of the Constitution gave the chief economic policymaking role to
0 the courts.
0 the Federal Reserve Board.
0 the president.
1 Congress.
0 the states. 

The Constitution prohibited the states from doing each of the following EXCEPT
0 harboring runaway slaves.
0 placing duties on imports from other states.
0 printing paper money.
1 establishing a republican form of government.
0 interfering with lawfully contracted debts. 

The delegates to the Constitutional Convention did not worry about preserving individualrights for all of the following reasons EXCEPT
0 every state had its own bill of rights.
0 they were constructing a limited government that could not threaten personal freedoms.
1 they included a bill of rights in Article V.
0 they dispersed power so that each branch or level could constrain the other.
0 the various states were already doing a sufficient job of protecting individual rights. 

Each of the following violations of individual rights is forbidden in the original ConstitutionEXCEPT
0 passing ex post facto laws.
0 strict limits on the prosecution of treason.
0 passing bills of attainder.
0 suspension of the writ of habeas corpus.
1 suspension of freedom of speech. 

The government designed at the Constitutional Convention allowed the voters to directly elect
0 both the House and Senate.
0 the president and all members of Congress.
0 only the Senate.
0 only the president.
1 only the House of Representatives. 

Madisonian principles in the Constitution were based on
0 states ¹ rights.
0 a concentration of power, so that the minority faction could dominate the government.
0 the belief that government should always be dominated by the majority.
1 concern that government would be dominated by a majority or minority faction.
0 the ideas of a group of professors at Madison University. 

The one element of government that Madison's plan placed within direct control of the voterswas the
0 Senate.
0 presidency.
0 Congress.
1 House of Representatives.
0 Supreme Court. 

Two key elements of the Madisonian model were to
1 keep most of the government beyond the control of a popular majority and separate the powers of different institutions.
0 promote state power while separating the powers of different national institutions.
0 keep as much of the government as possible beyond the control of a popular majority and extend the right to vote to everyone.
0 combine the powers of different institutions and create a powerful presidency.
0 require a system of checks and balances and extend democracy. 

The system of checks and balances in the Constitution means that
0 a majority can easily manipulate the system, but a minority cannot.
0 changes in government policy can be made with relative ease, with few obstacles to stop a popular new force.
0 we have a direct democracy, with all branches equally accessible to strong public pressure.
1 change usually comes slowly, if at all, and moderation and compromise are typical in our political system.
0 each branch of government has its own powers independent of the other. 

The Madisonian requirement that each branch of government acquire the consent of the othersfor many of its actions created a system of
0 confederated government.
1 checks and balances.
0 constitutional republic.
0 cross-cutting requirements.
0 separation of powers. 

The Madisonian system
0 is a form of direct democracy.
0 encourages change.
1 has a conservative bias favoring the status quo.
0 discourages moderation and compromise.
0 both C and D 

Under the Madisonian model, people desiring change
0 find a government that is highly responsive and acts quickly and decisively.
1 must usually have a sizable majority.
0 have no chance of victory.
0 need only win at one point in the policymaking process.
0 need just a simple majority over 50 percent. 

The Federalist Papers were
1 essays in support of ratification of the constitution.
0 essays written that were critical of the constitution.
0 newspapers which backed the Federalist party in early United States elections.
0 the original name of the constitution written by the Constitutional Convention.
0 the notes that George Washington took at the Constitutional Convention. 

Ratification of the Constitution
1 needed the approval of nine states.
0 needed the approval of a majority of the people.
0 occurred when it was approved by the delegates to the Constitutional Convention.
0 needed the approval of all the states.
0 was by two-thirds vote of the Continental Congress. 

Which of the following statements about the Anti-Federalists is FALSE?
1 The Anti-Federalists were basically unpatriotic and un-American.
0 The Anti-Federalists fought to prevent ratification of the new constitution.
0 The Anti-Federalists believed that the new government was an enemy of freedom.
0 The Anti-Federalists believed the new government would erode fundamental liberties.
0 The Anti-Federalists believed the new Constitution was a class-based document. 


Opposition to ratification of the Constitution was based on the belief that it would
1 provide for elite control, endanger liberty, and weaken the states.
0 produce more democratic elements than desirable for a strong central government.
0 give too much power to the states.
0 promote pluralism, which would threaten liberty.
0 all of the above 

The Bill of Rights was added to the Constitution
0 during the ratification process, before final ratification of the constitution.
0 during the Constitutional Convention, at the insistence of Thomas Jefferson.
1 after the ratification process was complete, and partly to fulfill a promise to those who supported ratification.
0 in 1865 after the union victory in the Civil War.
0 piece by piece during the first hundred years of its operation. 

Ratification of the Constitution was done by
0 the voters in each state casting open ballots.
1 special conventions in each state.
0 the state legislatures approving the document.
0 approval by the Supreme Court.
0 majority vote of the delegates at the Constitutional Convention. 

The Constitution was ratified by
0 popular vote in each of the states.
1 special conventions in each of the states.
0 the electoral college.
0 state representatives to the Constitutional Convention.
0 the state legislatures. 

The amendments that have been added to the Constitution have made it
1 more egalitarian and democratic.
0 more elitist and undemocratic.
0 more protective of property rights.
0 weaker and less significant to American society.
0 much more like the European constitutions it originally condemned. 

Constitutional amendments are usually ratified by
0 state conventions called by two-thirds vote in Congress.
0 a national convention.
0 a majority of the Supreme Court.
0 a two-thirds vote in each house of Congress.
1 legislatures of three-fourths of the states. 

The most important effect of the constitutional amendments has been to
1 expand liberty and equality.
0 reinforce elite control of government.
0 expand the powers of the states.
0 strengthen the capitalist economy.
0 all of the above 

Which of the following statements about the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) is FALSE?
0 The ERA was opposed by many southern states.
0 The ERA was proposed by Congress in 1978.
1 Public opinion polls showed little support for the ERA after 1960.
0 The ERA was first proposed in 1923.
0 The ERA never became part of the Constitution. 

To propose a formal amendment to the Constitution, one needs to have a
0 three-quarters vote in Congress.
0 national convention requested by half of the states.
0 majority vote of the Supreme Court.
1 two-thirds vote in Congress.
0 the president's approval. 

The failure of the Equal Rights Amendment showed that
0 Congress was unwilling to support a measure opposed by a strong minority of the public.
1 a national majority in favor of an amendment is not sufficient to add it to the Constitution.
0 most states did not want to grant constitutional equality to women.
0 we are a democracy, and majority opinion prevails.
0 men are pigs, still unwilling to grant women equal rights. 

Which of the following is established by the written Constitution?
0 the right to an abortion
0 media coverage of the House and Senate
0 political parties
0 All of these are mentioned in the written Constitution.
1 None of these are mentioned in the written Constitution. 

Informal changes to the Constitution have reflected changes in all of the following EXCEPT
0 technology.
0 political practice.
0 judicial interpretation.
1 constitutional amendments.
0 none of the above 

How has the electoral college changed from the original intent of the framers?
0 Affirmative action programs have made the student body much more diverse, although standards have also been lowered.
0 The president must now be elected by two-thirds vote of the electoral college rather than a simple majority.
0 The number of electors has decreased dramatically.
1 Almost all electors now vote for the presidential candidate who wins the most popular votes in their state.
0 Today, the electors vote for whom they personally feel would make the best president. 

The Supreme Court in Marbury v. Madison (1803) asserted the power of the Court to
1 check the actions of the other branches through judicial review.
0 nullify constitutional amendments.
0 confirm presidential appointments.
0 determine its own size and makeup.
0 impeach the president. 

Political parties are an important example of the
0 Third Amendment.
0 formal amendment process.
1 unwritten constitution.
0 wishes of the founders.
0 rigidity of the Constitution. 

Which of the following statements about judicial interpretation is FALSE?
0 Judicial interpretation can profoundly affect how the Constitution is understood.
0 The power of judicial review gives courts the right to decide whether legislative actions are in accord with the Constitution.
1 The power of judicial interpretation is explicitly stated in the Constitution.
0 In the case of Marbury v. Madison, the Supreme Court decided it would be the one to decide constitutional disputes.
0 none of the above 

The development of the two-party system is an example of informal constitutional changethrough
1 political practice.
0 technology.
0 judicial interpretation.
0 increasing demands on policymakers.
0 all of the above 

The United States Constitution
0 lists the executive departments that are required to advise the president.
1 does not prescribe the function and structure of government in detail.
0 is one of the oldest and longest constitutions in the world.
0 gives particular detail to the function of the judiciary.
0 was modeled on the British Constitution. 

Which of the following is FALSE about the Constitution?
0 It creates many government access points where groups can attempt to initiate or block policy changes.
1 It discourages hyperpluralism.
0 It places many limits on the government's powers.
0 It protects individual liberty.
0 It creates government gridlock and inaction. 

Some scholars have suggested that a consequence of separation of powers and checks andbalances has been
0 the inability of groups to get their grievances heard.
1 fragmented policymaking processes.
0 the tyranny of the majority.
0 streamlined, but hasty, government decision making.
0 political instability. 

The separation of powers and the checks and balances established by the Constitution
1 allow almost all groups some place in the political system where their demands for public policy can be heard.
0 have acted to discourage the growth of groups in American society.
0 have made the United States one of the most democratic countries in the world.
0 create so many obstacles that groups have no place for their policy demands to be heard.
0 are basically undemocratic since only elites can formulate policies within the system. 


The government's responses in the wake of Hurricane Katrina underscores
0 the neccesity of complying with the letter and the spirit of the Third Amendment.
0 the tensions between Congress and the president.
0 the ability of the U.S. military to mobilize and deploy quickly.
1 the complexity of American federalism.
0 all of the above 

Federalism is
1 a system of shared power by the state and national governments.
0 the same as unitary government.
0 sole government authority in the national government.
0 sole government authority in the states.
0 a three-branch government with a system of checks and balances. 

Federalism is
0 unique to the United States alone.
0 practiced by about half the nations worldwide.
0 practiced in about half the American states.
0 practiced by nearly all of the 190 nations worldwide.
1 practiced by fewer than 20 nations worldwide. 


The workings of the federal system are sometimes called
0 internal relations.
1 intergovernmental relations.
0 intrastate relations.
0 interstate relations.
0 international relations. 

Which of the following is NOT true?
0 Few countries have federal systems.
0 Most federal systems are democracies.
0 Authoritarian regimes generally do not use federalist systems.
1 No unitary governments are democratic.
0 Only some democracies use federal systems. 

Most of the governments in the world today are ________, in which all power resides in thecentral national government.
1 unitary
0 federalist
0 nationalist
0 confederations
0 fiscal 

Which of the following statements is TRUE?
1 The American states have unitary governments.
0 Federalism is the typical way nations organize their governments.
0 Great Britain has a federal system.
0 Most European countries are confederations.
0 none of the above 


Which of the following is an example of a confederation?
0 state governments in the United States
1 the United Nations
0 OPEC
0 Britain
0 France 

How is a unitary system different from a federal one?
0 The national government can coin money, conduct foreign relations, and declare war.
1 The national government can change the boundaries of states, or abolish them.
0 State governments have political autonomy and can nullify national laws.
0 Administrative subunits, such as states, can collect taxes, conduct elections, and make laws independently of the national government.
0 both B and C 

Federalism is a way of organizing a nation so that
0 power is centralized in state and local government.
1 both national and state levels of government have authority over the same land and people.
0 there is one federal government and all regional governments are administrative subunits of it.
0 power is centralized in the national government.
0 there are three branches of government and a system of checks and balances. 

Which one of the following countries has federalism as its method of governing?
1 Canada
0 China
0 France
0 Kenya
0 No other country uses federalism. 

The federal system
0 decreases judicial power.
0 centralizes our politics.
0 decreases opportunities for political participation.
0 decreases the number of government officeholders.
1 decentralizes our politics. 

Which of the following is NOT an effect of federalism?
1 It simplifies the governmental system.
0 Courts are called upon to be referees, and they gain power.
0 It decentralizes political power.
0 It creates more access points to government.
0 It increases bureaucracy. 

The power to directly regulate such things as drinking ages, marriage and divorce, and sexualbehavior has been granted
0 to all governments by the Bill of Rights.
0 to the national government.
0 to the president.
1 to state governments.
0 to both the state and national governments. 

States are responsible for most public policies dealing with each of the following issuesEXCEPT
1 economic issues.
0 social issues.
0 police powers.
0 family issues.
0 moral issues. 

Laws that directly regulate abortion, drinking ages, marriage and divorce, or sexual behaviorare policy prerogatives that belong to
0 the bureaucracy.
1 the states.
0 Congress.
0 local governments.
0 federal courts. 

All of the following are examples of how federalism decentralizes our policies EXCEPT
1 federal income tax.
0 regulation of abortion.
0 death penalty.
0 funding of education.
0 homeland security. 

Which of these is NOT among the factors that tend to lead to the creation of a federal form ofgovernment in a country?
0 large population
0 diverse population
0 large land area
0 the existence of multiple religions
1 industrialization 

In our federal system, the powers of the state governments are ultimately granted by
0 their state's Supreme Court.
0 the people of their state.
0 their state legislature.
1 the United States Constitution.
0 the United States government. 


From clean-air legislation to welfare reforms, the states constitute a ________ to develop andtest public policies and share the results with other states and the national government.
0 major roadblock
1 national laboratory
0 neglected resource
0 last chance
0 severe reluctance 

Almost every policy the national government has adopted has originated with
0 the Senate.
1 the states.
0 the House of Representatives.
0 the Supreme Court.
0 the president. 

Which of the following statements about federalism is FALSE?
1 Federalism was hotly debated at the Constitutional Convention.
0 Eighteenth-century Americans had little experience in thinking of themselves as Americans first and state citizens second.
0 There was no other practical choice in 1787 but to create a federal system of government.
0 Loyalty to state governments was so strong that the Constitution would have been resoundingly defeated had it tried to abolish them.
0 None of the above; all are TRUE. 

The supremacy clause of the Constitution states that all of the following are the supreme lawof the land, EXCEPT
0 laws of the national government (when consistent with the Constitution).
0 the United States Constitution.
1 state constitutions.
0 treaties of the national government (when consistent with the Constitution).
0 both C and D 

The Constitution's supremacy clause
0 does not apply to state and local matters.
0 gives the states superiority over the national government's Constitution and laws.
1 made the Constitution, the laws of the national government, and the national government's treaties the supreme law of the land.
0 is vague about which level of government should prevail in a dispute involving federalism.
0 makes the president supreme in any constitutional conflicts with the other two branches. 

The efforts of Candy Lightner and Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD) to raise the legaldrinking age to 21 are an example of
0 the supremacy of state government to regulate its own affairs.
0 the constitutional authority of the national government to impose policies on state governments.
0 states acting as policy innovators.
0 the unconstitutionality of age discrimination.
1 the ability of the national government to influence state policy. 



In the Constitution, the powers to coin money, to enter into treaties, and to regulate commercewith foreign nations and among the states were given to
0 neither the individual states nor the national government.
1 the national government.
0 the individual states.
0 the Senate only.
0 both the individual states and the national government. 


Only the national government is allowed to
0 levy taxes.
1 regulate commerce with foreign nations.
0 take private property for public purposes.
0 make and enforce laws.
0 all of the above 

What was the main criticism of the national bank created by the United States government?
0 It was printing too much worthless paper money which debtors were using to pay off their debts.
0 It was charging exorbitant interest rates on its loans.
0 It was borrowing too much money, putting the United States government hopelessly in debt.
1 It was an instrument of the elite and gave the national government too much control of the economy.
0 It did not efficiently distribute money to the states. 


In its McCulloch v. Maryland decision, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of
0 judicial restraint.
0 judicial review.
1 the supremacy of the national government over the states.
0 the supremacy of the states over the national government.
0 Maryland in a dispute with the national government. 

The McCulloch v. Maryland case dealt with what specific grievance?
1 a state taxing a national bank
0 toll bridges on interstate roads
0 the location of Maryland's capital city
0 a state coining its own money
0 import taxes on goods made in other states 

The principle of the supremacy of federal law over state law was affirmed in
0 Marbury v. Madison.
0 the Tenth Amendment.
0 United States v. Darby.
1 McCulloch v. Maryland.
0 the presidential election of 1804. 

The Supreme Court case of McCulloch v. Maryland (1819)
0 established Baltimore as the capital of Maryland.
1 stated that the Constitution gave Congress implied powers.
0 established the principle of judicial review.
0 established the supremacy of state governments.
0 recognized that Congress was limited to its enumerated powers. 

The principle that the national government has certain implied powers that go beyond itsenumerated powers was first elaborated in the Supreme Court's decision in
0 United States v. the States.
0 Gibbons v. Ogden.
0 Miranda v. Arizona.
1 McCulloch v. Maryland.
0 Marbury v. Madison. 

The enumerated powers of Congress and the national government are those
1 specifically spelled out in the Constitution.
0 set out in the first ten amendments.
0 involving taxes, spending, and fiscal policy.
0 not specifically spelled out in the Constitution, but nonetheless acknowledged.
0 requiring ratification by the states. 

Federal policies to regulate food and drugs, build interstate highways, protect consumers, tryto clean up dirty air and water, and do many other things are all justified as ________ ofCongress.
1 implied powers
0 categorical grants
0 constitutionally specified powers
0 reserved powers
0 enumerated powers 

The Constitution's provision that Congress has the right to   make all laws necessary andproper for carrying into execution   its powers is often referred to as the
0 enumerated powers.
0 heart of fiscal federalism.
0 Unwritten Amendment.
1 elastic clause.
0 privileges and immunities. 


The Constitution states that Congress has the power to establish post offices. This is anexample of
1 enumerated powers.
0 delegated powers.
0 implied powers.
0 reserved powers.
0 shared powers. 

Which of the following federal policies exemplifies the implied powers of Congress?
1 environmental protection law
0 income tax
0 the regulation of interstate commerce
0 the provision of an army and a navy
0 all of the above 

Federal policies to regulate food and drugs, build interstate highways, and protect consumersare all justified as
0 presidential prerogatives.
0 enumerated powers of Congress.
0 delegated powers of Congress.
1 implied powers of Congress.
0 both C and D 

The Supreme Court case of Gibbons v. Ogden
0 defined the meaning of the elastic clause.
0 settled the contested presidential election of 1824.
1 defined commerce as virtually every form of commercial activity.
0 established the principle of implied powers.
0 established the supremacy of the national government. 

Enumerated powers are those that are
0 reserved for the states.
1 stated in the Constitution.
0 implied in the Constitution.
0 involving money matters.
0 granted specifically to the president. 

Abraham Lincoln announced in his 1861 inaugural address that he would willingly support aconstitutional amendment to
0 prohibit states from seceding from the Union.
0 return the United States to a confederation, with greater powers given to the states.
0 establish the United States as a unitary system, where states would have to obey all national government decisions.
0 outlaw slavery.
1 guarantee slavery. 


In the 1950s and 1960s, the proclamation of states ¹ rights was usually made by those opposingthe national government's efforts in the area of
0 the Vietnam War.
0 abortion rights.
1 civil rights for African Americans.
0 the interstate highway system.
0 the Korean War. 

The Constitution requires that states give ________ to the public acts, records, and civil judicialproceedings of every other state.
0 privileges and immunities
0 due process
1 full faith and credit
0 some consideration
0 extradition 

Contracts between business firms can be enforced across state boundaries as part of theconstitutional provision of
0 interstate compacts.
0 privileges and immunities.
0 implied powers of the states.
0 extradition.
1 full faith and credit. 

A marriage license issued in one state is valid and honored in all states under theconstitutional provision of
0 separation of powers.
1 full faith and credit.
0 national supremacy.
0 national licensure.
0 privileges and immunities. 

The fact that a driver's license from one state is valid in other states is an example of
0 privileges and immunities.
0 extradition.
0 implied powers.
1 full faith and credit.
0 unmandated reciprocity. 

The constitutional requirement that the states return a person charged with a crime in anotherstate to that state for trial or imprisonment is known as
0 forfeiture.
1 extradition.
0 privileges and immunities.
0 full faith and credit.
0 the elastic clause. 

One recently controversial application of the   full faith and credit   provision of theConstitution is for
0 extradition.
0 birth certificates.
1 same gender marriages.
0 bigamy.
0 abortion 

Extradition is the requirement that states
0 provide sanctuary for federal criminals.
0 cannot discriminate against citizens of other states.
0 recognize each others public acts, records, and civil judicial proceedings.
1 must return a person charged with a crime in another state to that state for trial or imprisonment.
0 enforce federal law within their state. 

In ________ federalism, the powers and policy assignments of the different levels ofgovernment are distinct, like a layer cake.
0 fiscal
1 dual
0 tripartite
0 cooperative
0 anti- 

The national government has exclusive control over foreign and military policy, the postalsystem, and monetary policy, while the states have exclusive control over other specific areas.This division of responsibilities reflects
1 dual federalism.
0 divided government.
0 tripartite federalism.
0 cooperative federalism.
0 fiscal federalism. 

In Saenz v. Roe, the Supreme Court ruled that
0 California was required to recognize the legality of same sex marriages.
1 California could not require a new resident to wait one year before being eligible for welfare benefits.
0 California could withhold educational benefits from children of illegal immigrants.
0 California was required to offer bilingual education programs in the public elementary schools.
0 California could not provide welfare benefits to illegal immigrants. 

A tuition difference between in-state and out-of-state students is an example of
0 dual federalism.
0 federal exceptions to the full faith and credit provision.
0 full faith and credit being extended to all students.
1 how states make exceptions to the privileges and immunities clause.
0 project grants to the states. 

If the allocation of power in a cooperative federal system were compared to a cake it would bemost like
0 a layer cake with two distinct layers.
0 a single-layer cake.
0 a cake walk: who gets what is random.
1 fifty marbled cupcakes.
0 a layer cake with many layers. 

If the allocation of power under dual federalism were compared to a cake it would be mostlike
0 a marbled cake where the flavors blend into each other.
0 an angel food cakeî€„fluffy with little substance.
0 New York cheesecakeî€„heavy and crushing under its own weight.
1 a layer cake, with two distinct layers.
0 a cupcake. 

Over time, there has been a gradual change from a dual federalism to a(n) ________federalism.
0 unitary
0 single
0 tripartite
1 cooperative
0 fiscal 

In ________ federalism, the powers and policy assignments of different levels of governmentare like a marble cake, with mingled responsibilities and blurred distinctions between layers ofgovernment.
0 fiscal
0 mixed
0 dual
1 cooperative
0 tripartite 

In dual federalism,
0 the state governments assume greater fiscal responsibility.
0 there are only two branches of government.
0 the federal government assumes greater fiscal responsibility.
0 powers are shared between states and the federal government.
1 states and the national government each remain supreme within their own spheres. 

In cooperative federalism,
0 states and the national government each remain supreme within their own spheres.
1 responsibilities are mingled and distinctions are blurred between the levels of government.
0 powers and policy assignments of the layers of government are distinct.
0 states are supreme over the national government.
0 both A and B 

Since the ratification of the Constitution, American federalism has gradually changed from
0 cooperative to dual federalism.
0 state domination to national domination.
1 dual to cooperative federalism.
0 a unitary to a federal system.
0 a federal system to a unitary one. 

Which of the following statements about federalism is false?
0 In cooperative federalism, sometimes even blame is shared when programs do not work well.
1 The American system has always been neatly separated into purely state and purely national responsibilities.
0 In cooperative federalism, policy assignments are shared between states and the national government.
0 Cooperative federalism today rests on several standard operating procedures.
0 None; all are true. 

Federal support for public education is an example of a
0 pragmatic federalism.
0 dual federalism.
1 cooperative federalism.
0 layer cake federalism.
0 separation of powers 

Funding for the interstate highway system is an example of
0 dual federalism.
1 cooperative federalism.
0 tripartite federalism.
0 a unitary system of government.
0 national federalism. 

The National Defense Education Act, the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, and theInterstate Highway System are all examples of
0 dual federalism.
1 cooperative federalism.
0 triangulation.
0 layer cake federalism.
0 unitary federalism 

Which of the following is NOT a standard operating procedure of cooperative federalismtoday?
1 distinctly separated powers of state and national governments
0 federal grants-in-aid
0 shared administration of programs
0 shared financing of government
0 federal guidelines imposed on states 

Which of the following does NOT characterize the standard operating procedure ofcooperative federalism today?
0 federal guidelines
0 grants-in-aid
0 shared costs
1 separate and distinct roles for the national and state governments
0 shared administration 

Standard operating procedures in cooperative federalism include each of the followingEXCEPT
0 shared administration.
0 shared costs.
1 federal funding with no strings attached.
0 federal guidelines.
0 categorical and block grants. 

In cooperative federalism, in order to qualify for federal grant money, cities and states must
0 match federal funding dollar for dollar.
0 propose standard operating procedures.
0 allow federal agencies to administer the funds.
1 follow federal guidelines for adopting and enforcing federal laws.
0 all of the above 

Federal regulation of state governments is usually accomplished through
0 United States Supreme Court decisions.
0 presidential decrees.
1 attaching conditions to grants it gives them.
0 federalization of a state's national guard.
0 direct, executive orders. 

About ________ of the funds state and local governments spend comes from the federalgovernment.
0 33 percent
1 25 percent
0 50 percent
0 75 percent
0 90 percent 

Federal aid to state and local governments accounts for how much of federal spending?
0 33 percent
0 50 percent
0 2 percent
1 18 percent
0 75 percent 

The main instrument the national government uses to influence state governments is
1 grants-in-aid.
0 mandates.
0 judicial review.
0 the Tenth Amendment.
0 presidential decrees. 


The pattern of spending, taxing, and providing grants in the federal system is called
0 economic federalism.
0 dual federalism.
0 cooperative federalism.
1 fiscal federalism.
0 monetary federalism. 

The main instrument the national government uses for both aiding and influencing states andlocalities is
0 judicial decisions.
0 politics.
1 grants-in-aid.
0 mandates.
0 revenue sharing. 

Of all the funds spent by state and local governments, federal aid accounts for about
0 two-thirds.
0 one-half.
1 one-fourth.
0 three percent.
0 one-third. 

The principal type of federal aid for states and localities is
1 categorical grants.
0 disaster loans.
0 revenue sharing.
0 block grants.
0 urban renewal grants. 

Which of the following is NOT true about categorical grants?
1 The federal government is less likely to apply conditions to these grants today than in the 1970s.
0 There are several hundred specific purposes or categories for which these grants can be used.
0 Virtually every one is enshrouded in rules and regulations for its use.
0 A project grant is the most typical type of categorical grant.
0 Categorical grants are monies that can be spent in broad categories of functions. 

The main type of federal aid to state and local governments is in the form of
0 block grants.
0 formula grants.
1 categorical grants.
0 project grants
0 revenue sharing. 

The requirement of a drinking age provision before states can receive federal highway aid isan example of
1 a string attached to categorical grants.
0 an important element of the   formula   used to calculate formula grants.
0 a project grant supported by the interest groups.
0 the efforts of state agencies to get federal funds.
0 an unfunded mandate. 

The most common type of categorical grant is
0 block grants.
0 a rescission fund.
1 project grants.
0 disaster relief.
0 revenue sharing. 


Programs such as Medicaid and Aid for Families with Dependent Children, where applicantsautomatically qualify for aid if they meet the requirements, are examples of
0 dual federalism.
0 project grants.
1 formula grants.
0 block grants.
0 welfare. 

In contrast to the Democratic Congress of recent decades, the new Republican majority inCongress is passing more federal aid in the form of
0 revenue sharing.
0 categorical grants.
1 block grants.
0 tax credits.
0 tax expenditures. 


In response to complaints from state and local governments about the paperwork andrequirements attached to most grants, Congress has established ________ to support programsin areas like community development and social services.
0 formula grants
1 block grants
0 project grants
0 categorical grants
0 computerized grant applications 

On the whole, federal grant distribution follows the principle of
1 universalism.
0 stinginess.
0 cronyism.
0 to the victors go the spoils.
0 needs-testing. 

Project grants
0 have no strings attached.
1 are awarded on the basis of competitive applications.
0 are distributed according to a specific formula.
0 are automatically given to states and communities.
0 all of the above 

Grants for specific programs distributed according to community demographic factors, such aspopulation or income, are
1 formula grants.
0 categorical grants.
0 revenue sharing grants.
0 project grants.
0 block grants. 

Medicaid and Aid for Families with Dependent Children are examples of
0 categorical grants.
1 formula grants.
0 project grants.
0 state grants.
0 block grants. 

Grants that are given more or less automatically to states or communities, which havediscretion in deciding how to spend the money are called
0 project grants.
0 discretionary grants.
0 formula grants.
0 categorical grants.
1 block grants. 

A broad program for community development would most likely be supported through a(n)
0 formula grant.
0 enterprise zone.
0 project grant.
0 categorical grant.
1 block grant. 

Which of the following statements about federal block grants is FALSE?
0 Block grants were created to lessen the paperwork and strings attached to many grants-in-aid.
1 Congress has established an unlimited number of block grants to support narrowly defined programs.
0 The Republican Congress is increasing block grants.
0 States have discretion in deciding how to spend block grant money.
0 They provide the states more flexibility in spending. 

The largest percentage of federal grants to states and localities is in the area of
0 defense.
1 health.
0 transportation.
0 education.
0 homeland security. 

Expansions of mandated programs by the national government present especially difficultfunding problems for
0 Congress.
0 federal taxpayers.
1 state and local governments.
0 foreign governments.
0 the recipient of the service or program. 

In 1995, the Republican majority in Congress, in contrast to previous Democratic Congresses,
1 limited the use of unfunded mandates.
0 prohibited the states from using unfunded mandates.
0 limited the use of block grants.
0 avoided funded mandates.
0 all of the above 

Medicaid is an example of
0 a federal grant program that produces considerable competition between the states.
0 a federal grant program that receives little support from the political parties.
0 a federal block grant.
1 a federal grant program that puts an economic strain on the states.
0 all of the above 

Which of the following is most equitably distributed in America?
0 income
0 access to education
0 taxes
0 credit
1 federal aid to states and cities 

Which of the following statements is TRUE?
1 Federal grants can put an unwanted financial burden on states.
0 When Congress imposes a program on the states, it also provides the funds for the program.
0 Congress decreased funding of Medicaid in the 1980s to relieve state financial burdens.
0 States are always seeking increases in grant programs.
0 all of the above 


________ have usually found the individual state governments to be more sympathetic thanthe national government to their demands.
0 Feminists
0 Civil rights advocates
1 Business interests
0 Those favoring the closing of military bases
0 Supporters of organized labor 

Sometimes states tackle problems that are generally considered national problems. This ismost likely to occur when the federal government acts in a way that most state residents donot like. An example of this is
1 state funding for stem cell research in California.
0 lowering the minimum wage.
0 collecting taxes on purchases made on the Internet.
0 restrictions on the chemicals that can be used for developing digital photographs.
0 local school board policies about which textbooks are appropriate. 

Business interests have traditionally found their demands received most favorably by
1 state governments.
0 the courts.
0 Congress.
0 the president.
0 cities. 

Federalism is advantageous for democracy for each of the following reasons EXCEPT
0 allows for a greater diversity of opinion to be reflected in public policies.
1 increases the number of decisions and compromises made at the national level.
0 increases access to government.
0 allows more opportunities for political participation.
0 allows customization of policies for local needs. 

Federalism contributes to democracy by each of the following ways EXCEPT
0 easing the burdens on the national government so it can function more effectively.
0 increasing the opportunities for government to be responsive to demands for policies.
0 increasing access to government.
0 having state governments add thousands of elected offices for which citizens may vote or run.
1 providing a means for unified public policy. 

As a result of our federal form of government, the death penalty in the United States
0 is mandatory.
0 is in violation of the Eighth Amendment.
0 is permissible at the federal level, but banned at the state level.
1 varies substantially by state.
0 is permissible because it is not considered cruel and unusual punishment. 


Spending on public education illustrates
0 cooperation between states and federal government for unified policy.
0 the advantages of fiscal federalism.
1 the diversity in the quality of education among states as a result of federalism.
0 the national curriculum that exists in the United States.
0 advantages of relying on states to supply public services. 

How many governments are there in the United States?
0 538
1 over 100,000
0 51
0 one
0 50 

Which of the following statements is FALSE?
0 The federal government has given billions of dollars in subsidies to private industries.
0 The national government took a direct interest in economic affairs from the very founding of the republic.
0 As the country became more industrialized many interests asked the national government to restrain monopolies and encourage open competition.
1 As the country became more industrialized and urbanized, economic interest groups turned to the state governments rather than the federal government for help.
0 The national government has increasingly involved itself in the economic marketplace. 


Over the last 125 years the people of the United States have turned increasingly to the nationalgovernment to solve problems or provide assistance because
0 the Tenth Amendment gave increased power to the national government.
1 a problem or policy often requires the authority and resources of the national government.
0 of corruption at the state level.
0 we have a unitary government.
0 of persistent corruption in state and local government. 

America's ________ society makes it more sensible to have Social Security administered on anational rather than a state-by-state basis.
0 electronic
0 free enterprise
1 mobile
0 multi-ethnic
0 aging 

Today, the national government spends roughly ________ of the gross domestic product.
0 15 percent
1 20 percent
0 2.5 percent
0 9 percent
0 44 percent 

The proportion of the United States gross national product spent by state and localgovernments has ________ since 1929.
0 increased at a much faster rate compared to the national government
1 increased, but not nearly as fast as the national government's
0 dropped considerably
0 remained steady
0 dropped slightly 

Today, roughly ________ of the gross domestic product is spent by state and localgovernments.
0 7.5 percent
0 25 percent
0 10 percent
0 15 percent
1 1 percent 


Since 1929, the national government's share of American governmental expenditures has
0 dropped.
0 remained the same.
0 approached nearly 100 percent.
1 grown rapidly.
0 grown at a slower rate than the states ¹ share. 

Today, the national government spends about
0 a tenth of our gross domestic product.
0 a half of our gross domestic product.
0 100 percent of our gross domestic product.
1 a fifth of our gross domestic product.
0 a third of our gross domestic product. 

Which of the following statements about the state governments is accurate?
1 They carry out virtually all the functions they always have, while the national government has taken on new functions.
0 The national government has taken away nearly all the functions the states used to perform.
0 The national government has taken away about half the functions the states used to perform.
0 There has been a sharp decrease in the proportion of gross national product spent by states and localities since 1929.
0 Their policy functions have nearly been taken over by the national government. 


Civil liberties are
0 freedoms that are not specified in the Constitution or in statutory laws, but make up the Unwritten Constitution.
0 the rights to vote and participate in the political process in a democracy.
0 laws that provide and set limits on one's freedoms.
0 citizens ¹ rights to equal treatment under the law.
1 individual legal and constitutional protections against the government. 

Americans ¹ civil liberties are set down in
0 the Declaration of Independence.
1 the Bill of Rights.
0 Article I of the Constitution.
0 no written document or law.
0 the Preamble to the Constitution. 

The ________ is the final interpreter of the content and scope of Americans ¹ civil liberties.
0 president
0 Congress
1 Supreme Court
0 American Civil Liberties Union
0 Constitution 


At the time of the ratification of the Constitution,
1 all states had bills of rights but there was no national Bill of Rights.
0 the national Bill of Rights also applied to the states.
0 there were no bills of rights in the United States.
0 both the national government and the states had bills of rights.
0 the national government had a Bill of Rights but, there were no state bills of rights. 

The Bill of Rights was written and proposed by
0 the United States Supreme Court in 1796.
1 the First Congress of the United States in 1789.
0 the Constitutional Convention in 1787.
0 President George Washington in 1789.
0 President Thomas Jefferson in 1801. 

The Bill of Rights was adopted primarily in response to
0 the Spanish Inquisition.
1 British abuses of the colonists ¹ civil liberties.
0 the abuses committed by the United States Continental Army during the Revolutionary War.
0 the horrors of the French Revolution.
0 Shays ¹ Rebellion. 

Which of the following statements about the Bill of Rights is FALSE?
0 The Bill of Rights was written by the First Congress of the United States.
0 The Bill of Rights consists of the first ten amendments to the Constitution.
1 Most state constitutions did not have a Bill of Rights at the time of the Constitutional Convention.
0 Many states made adoption of a Bill of Rights a condition of ratification of the Constitution.
0 The Constitution of 1787 contained no Bill of Rights. 

In the case of ________, the Supreme Court ruled that the Bill of Rights restrained only thenational government, not states and cities.
0 Miranda v. Arizona
1 Barron v. Baltimore
0 New York v. the United States
0 Engel v. Vitale
0 Gitlow v. New York 

The great freedoms of speech, press, religion, and assembly are contained in the
0 First, Second, Third and Fourth Amendments.
0 Fourth Amendment.
0 Second Amendment.
0 Third Amendment.
1 First Amendment. 

The Supreme Court decision in Barron v. Baltimore (1833) maintained that the Bill of Rightsintended to prevent
0 both the national and state governments from violating civil rights.
0 cities from taking private property without due process.
1 only the national government from abridging civil liberties.
0 the states from infringing on individual rights.
0 the United States government from granting titles of royalty. 

Today, ________ apply to the states.
0 all of the Bill of Rights except the First Amendment
0 all of the Bill of Rights
0 none of the Bill of Rights
0 four amendments of the Bill of Rights
1 all but five provisions or amendments of the Bill of Rights 

Beginning with the case of ________ in 1925, the Supreme Court began to rule that the Bill ofRights applied directly to the states, as well as to the national government.
0 United States v. Bill of Rights
0 Miranda v. Arizona
0 Engel v. Vitale
0 Barron v. Baltimore
1 Gitlow v. New York 

In deciding to incorporate parts of the Bill of Rights into state laws since 1925, the SupremeCourt has relied on the due process clause of the
0 First Amendment.
0 Twenty-sixth Amendment.
1 Fourteenth Amendment.
0 Fifth Amendment.
0 Eighteenth Amendment. 

The ________ includes the clause   Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment ofreligion.  
0 Fifth Amendment
1 First Amendment
0 Second Amendment
0 Religious Rights Amendment
0 Fourteenth Amendment 

The incorporation doctrine involves
1 application of the Bill of Rights to the states.
0 the government's power to regulate corporations.
0 the procedures for creating a city government.
0 the interpretation of the commerce clause.
0 the extension of judicial review to state courts. 

Thomas Jefferson argued that the First Amendment created a   wall of separation   between
0 the government and the people.
0 the Congress, the president, and the Supreme Court.
0 the people and the Supreme Court.
1 church and state.
0 men and women. 

Unlike Great Britain and many other nations, the United States does not have an ________church that is officially supported by the government and recognized as a national institution.
0 ecclesiastical
0 adjudicated
0 imperial
0 incorporated
1 established 

Today, ________ have (has) an established church that is officially supported by thegovernment.
0 the United States
0 no nation
1 Great Britain
0 all nations
0 both the United States and Great Britain 

In Gitlow v. New York (1925), the decision that states could not abridge the freedoms ofexpression protected by the First Amendment was based on the
0 Fifth Amendment.
0 New York State Constitution.
1 Fourteenth Amendment.
0 First Amendment.
0 exclusionary rule of the judiciary. 

The significance of Gitlow v. New York (1925) was that
1 a provision of the Bill of Rights was applied to the states for the first time.
0 the national government was prevented from violating the Bill of Rights.
0 a state constitution had precedence over the United States Constitution within that state.
0 the Bill of Rights was interpreted as restraining only the national government and not cities or states.
0 the U.S. Constitution has precedence over the state constitution within the state. 

Aid to parochial schools was first passed in the 1960s at the request of
0 Richard M. Nixon.
0 Jimmy Carter.
0 John F. Kennedy.
1 Lyndon Johnson.
0 Barry Goldwater. 

In Lemon v. Kurtzman, the Supreme Court established that aid to church -related schools mustdo all of the following EXCEPT
0 have a secular purpose.
1 inhibit religion.
0 not advance religion.
0 not create excessive government entanglement with religion.
0 treat all religions equally. 

The abridgment of citizens ¹ freedom to worship, or not to worship, as they please is prohibitedby the
0 due process clause.
0 establishment clause.
1 free exercise clause.
0 freedom of religion.
0 Second Amendment. 

In dealing with First Amendment cases involving religion, the Supreme Court has ruled that
0 the Constitution does not protect anti-religious beliefs and practices.
0 such questions should be resolved at the state and local levels of government.
1 while all religious beliefs are constitutionally protected, all religious practices are not.
0 government must not interfere with any expression of religious faith.
0 none of the above 

In the Lemon v. Kurtzman decision of 1971, the Supreme Court ruled that
0 any aid of any sort to church-related schools is not constitutional, because it violates church-state separation.
0 aid to church-related schools is fully constitutional, and can be used for any purposes needed by the schools.
0 spoken prayers in public schools were unconstitutional.
1 aid to church-related schools must be for secular purposes only, and cannot be used to advance or inhibit religion.
0 devotional Bible-reading in public schools was unconstitutional. 

In the Engel v. Vitale case of 1962, the Supreme Court ruled that ________ was (were)unconstitutional.
1 prayers done as classroom exercises in public schools
0 the Connecticut statute barring the distribution of birth control information
0 segregation
0 prior restraint
0 police search or seizure without an authorized warrant 

The Supreme Court has interpreted the establishment clause of the First Amendment as
0 grounds for denying federal aid to children attending parochial schools.
0 merely preventing the establishment of a national church.
1 prohibiting school-organized Bible-reading and prayer in public schools.
0 allowing nondenominational school prayer.
0 all of the above 


In Lemon v. Kurtzman (1971), the Supreme Court ruled that
0 states can prohibit pornography despite the freedom of the press.
1 aid to church-related schools must have a secular legislative purpose.
0 religious freedom takes precedence over compulsory education laws.
0 an official prayer at a public-school graduation violated the constitutional separation of church and state.
0 voluntary prayer in public schools is unconstitutional. 

The Supreme Court has ruled that government aid to church -related schools
0 is acceptable for things such as field trips and teacher salaries, but not for textbooks or transportation to school.
1 is permitted when the aid is for a non-religious purpose.
0 is acceptable if the school is affiliated with a major religion but not for small, fringe religious sects.
0 violates the Establishment Clause.
0 does not constitute an establishment of religion. 

Government aid to religious schools has been a major issue
0 since the Civil War.
0 since the colonial era.
1 since the mid 1960s.
0 since ratification of the Bill of Rights.
0 since the growth of the fundamentalist movement in the 1980s. 

Which of the following is NOT a free exercise issue?
0 animal sacrifice
0 religious use of peyote
1 teacher led prayers in public schools
0 whether Amish children must go to school
0 none of the above 

In 2005, the Supreme Court found that two Kentucky counties violated the establishmentclause of the First Amendment by
0 establishing English as the   official first language of the State of Kentucky.  
0 by posting the Ten Commandments as a way of promoting religion.
1 banning   intelligent design   from the curriculum
0 providing an   inefficient   system of public education.
0 requiring students to say the Pledge of Allegiance. 

During the 1980s, the Supreme Court ________ the displaying of Christmas nativity scenes andHanukkah menorahs on public property.
0 refused to hear cases challenging
0 first permitted and then prohibited
1 upheld the constitutionality of
0 declared unconstitutional
0 encouraged 

In free exercise cases, the Supreme Court
1 allows the government to interfere with religious practices as long as it is not specifically aimed at religion.
0 permits the government to interfere with religious practices.
0 prohibits prayer in public schools but permits government aid to religious schools.
0 prohibits the government from interfering with religious practices.
0 never allows the government to interfere with religious practices. 

In regard to the free exercise clause, the Supreme Court has made each of the following rulingsEXCEPT
1 polygamy may be justified for Mormons on religious grounds.
0 the Air Force can enforce its dress code even against religiously based dress choices.
0 Amish parents may take their children out of school after the eighth grade.
0 people could become conscientious objectors to war on religious grounds.
0 public schools cannot require Jehovah's Witnesses to attend flag saluting ceremonies. 


Freedom of expression
1 has sometimes been limited when it conflicts with other rights and values.
0 is protected by the Fourth and Fifth Amendments.
0 is an absolute right protected by the First Amendment.
0 includes freedom of speech and press, but not actions.
0 would not protect a political rally to attack an opposition candidate's stand on issues. 


________ refers to a government's censorship of material before it is published.
0 The exclusionary rule
0 Probable cause
0 Equal protection
1 Prior restraint
0 Just cause 

In what case did the Supreme Court rule that a newspaper, no matter how outrageous itsopinions, must be allowed to publish without prior restraint?
0 Wisconsin v. Yoder
0 Miranda v. Arizona
1 Near v. Minnesota
0 New York Times v. Sullivan
0 Mapp v. Ohio 

The extent of an individual's or group's freedom from prior restraint depends on
0 whether the nation is at war.
0 nothingî€„it is absolute.
0 the moods of the Supreme Court justices.
1 who the individual or group is.
0 the Constitution. 


The Supreme Court has permitted prior restraint of which of the following?
1 high school newspapers
0 compact discs by 2 Live Crew
0 the Pentagon Papers
0 a newspaper that called local officials   Jewish gangsters  
0 It has permitted prior restraint of all of these. 

The Pentagon Papers dealt with
1 a documented history of United States involvement in the Vietnam War which the government wanted kept secret.
0 a documented history of United States involvement in the Korean War which the government wanted kept secret.
0 prisoners of war from World War II.
0 secret agreements between the United States and the Soviet Union.
0 all of the above 

Which of the following elements of the Bill of Rights was extended to the states by theSupreme Court case of Near v. Minnesota?
0 freedom of speech
1 freedom of the press
0 right to counsel in felony cases
0 grand jury requirement
0 right to privacy 

Time and time again, the Supreme Court has protected freedom of the press by
0 ruling in favor of strict libel laws.
1 striking down prior restraint.
0 refusing to allow the subpoena of reporters.
0 relaxing due process procedures.
0 all of the above 

The case of Near v. Minnesota (1931)
0 ruled that newspapers could not publish secret information that threatens national security.
0 ruled that states cannot prohibit animal sacrifice.
1 held that government had illegally issued a prior restraint.
0 identified an exception to the Constitutional guarantees barring government censorship of the press.
0 upheld Minnesota's right to close down a newspaper making slanderous remarks. 

Prior restraint is most often considered acceptable on the grounds of
0 libel.
0 obscenity.
1 national security.
0 cruel and unusual punishment.
0 religious freedom. 


In the case of New York Times v. United States in 1971, the Supreme Court ruled
0 against permitting racy advertisements for massage parlors, saunas, and escort services which could be deemed obscene.
1 against prior restraint in the case of the Pentagon Papers, which allowed them to be published.
0 that the government cannot file libel suits against newspapers, because, it would result in government censorship.
0 in favor of permitting racy advertisements for massage parlors, saunas, and escort services as freedom of speech.
0 in favor of prior restraint in order to prevent publication of the Pentagon Papers. 

In Schenck v. United States (1919), Justice Holmes said that speech can be restricted when it
0 is uttered by government officials in an effort to establish a religion.
1 provokes   a clear and present danger   to people.
0 advocates the violent overthrow of the United States.
0 is spoken rather than non-verbal or symbolic.
0 is expressed on private property. 

Constitutional protections of free speech are ________ on private property .
0 completely invalidated
0 fully protected
1 diminished
0 untested
0 unchanged 

A shield law
1 gives reporters the right to withhold information from the courts.
0 gives judges the right to issue a gag order.
0 protects certain religious practices not covered by Supreme Court rulings.
0 prevents the courts from closing criminal trials to the press.
0 prevents reporters from disclosing secret government information. 

The Supreme Court ruled in Branzburg v. Hayes (1972) that in the absence of shield laws,
1 the right of a free trial preempts the reporter's right to protect sources.
0 that newspaper files are protected by the First Amendment.
0 that reporters have more rights than other citizens.
0 judges can bar cameras from the courtroom.
0 none of the above 


The principle that   obscenity is not within the area of constitutionally protected speech orpress   was established in
1 Roth v. United States.
0 Osborne v. Ohio.
0 Miller v. California.
0 United States v. Snepp.
0 Ohio v. Pussycat Theater. 

Obscenity is
0 equated with nudity by the Supreme Court.
0 clearly defined as it pertains to both freedom of the press and freedom of speech.
0 prohibited in the First Amendment.
0 a matter of federal standards rather than state or local standards.
1 not protected under the Constitution. 

In Zurcher v. Stanford Daily, the Supreme Court ruled that
0 the Stanford Daily had complete control over its photograph files.
0 the Stanford Daily must cease publication of military strategy papers.
1 the Stanford Daily must open its files for use as police evidence.
0 the Stanford Daily must disclose the location of its reporters.
0 the Stanford Daily is controlled by the University president, not state laws. 

In ________, the Court clarified its doctrine of what was obscene, including such gauges aswhether material appealed to merely a prurient interest in sex, and whether it lacked seriousartistic, literary, political or scientific merit.
0 Osborne v. Ohio
0 Engel v. Vitale
1 Miller v. California
0 Near v. Minnesota
0 Federal Communications Commission v. Stern 

In Miller v. California (1971), the Court ruled that decisions regarding whether or not materialwas obscene should generally be made by
0 Congress, through statutory law.
0 lower federal judges as they see fit, but in conformance with the First Amendment.
1 local communities, with some guidelines provided by the Court itself about how to make such judgments.
0 the Supreme Court itself, on a case-by-case basis.
0 individual persons in their own private lives. 

Miller v. California (1973)
0 achieved a workable definition of legal obscenity.
0 abolished pornographic material only when it involved children.
0 resulted in uniform state laws regulating obscenity.
1 stated that local communities should have more responsibility over deciding what constitutes obscenity.
0 prohibited hanging as a cruel and unusual punishment. 

The Communications Decency Act banning obscene material and criminalizing thetransmission of indecent speech or images to anyone under the age of 18 was
0 affirmed by the Court.
0 opposed by Christian groups.
1 overturned by the Supreme Court.
0 the first regulation of obscenity affirmed by the Court.
0 none of the above 

At the urging of feminists and conservative Christians, some cities have banned pornographyon the grounds it dehumanizes and endangers women. How have the courts dealt with thesebans?
0 They have upheld them based on the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
0 They have refused to review them.
1 They have struck them down as violations of the First Amendment.
0 They have upheld them based on the First Amendment.
0 The courts have been erratic, allowing some ordinances and revoking others. 


The publication of statements known to be false that are malicious and tend to damage aperson's reputation is called
0 obscenity.
0 symbolic.
0 slander.
1 libel.
0 fraud. 

What happened when Jacksonville, Florida, tried to ban movies with nudity in them frombeing shown at drive-in theaters on grounds of obscenity?
0 The Court upheld the ban to protect citizens ¹ rights to privacy.
1 The Supreme Court ruled that all nudity cannot be deemed obscene.
0 The ban was upheld to help the community rid itself of a public nuisance and potential traffic hazard.
0 The Court ruled that X-rated movies were protected under the First Amendment.
0 a riot 

The principle that statements about public figures are libelous only if made with malice andreckless disregard for the truth was established in
0 Texas v. Johnson.
1 New York Times v. Sullivan.
0 Osborne v. Ohio.
0 the Anti-Defamation Act of 1952.
0 Hustler Magazine v. Falwell. 

Which of the following statements regarding libel is FALSE?
1 Public figures are protected against libel since publications must prove that what they wrote is true and not malicious.
0 Libel cases are very difficult for public figures to win.
0 Libel laws do inhibit the press to some extent.
0 General William Westmoreland failed to prove libel.
0 It is more difficult for a public figure than a private individual to win a libel suit. 

Wearing an arm band and burning a United States flag are examples of ________: actions thatdo not consist of speaking or writing but that express an opinion.
0 commercial speech
1 symbolic speech
0 obscenity
0 the free exercise clause
0 unspoken speech 

Symbolic speech
0 consists of speech criticizing the symbols of government.
0 cannot be prohibited because it is too vague for government to legislate against.
0 has been ruled as disruptive and as a criminal activity.
1 consists of action that expresses an opinion.
0 is prohibited under the First Amendment. 

Advertising is considered a form of ________, and, according to the decisions of the SupremeCourt, is subject to greater restrictions on free speech than religious or political speech.
0 symbolic speech
0 paid speech
0 imaged expression
0 propaganda
1 commercial speech 

Commercial speech on radio and television is regulated by
0 state and local governments.
0 no government agency, as such would be a violation of the freedom of speech.
0 the Federal Communications Commission.
1 the Federal Trade Commission.
0 the Bureau of Consumer Affairs. 

One of the most regulated forms of speech is
0 symbolic speech.
0 obscenity.
0 libel.
0 unintended speech.
1 commercial speech. 



In 2000, the Supreme Court ruled that
0 government had a legitimate interest in protecting sexually explicit material on cable stations.
0 government had no right to regulate sexually explicit material on cable stations.
0 government had a legitimate interest in prohibiting sexually explicit material on cable stations.
1 government regulation of sexually explicit material on cable stations must be narrowly tailored to promote the government's interest in protecting children.
0 government had a legitimate interest in protecting sexually explicit print material. 


Freedom of assembly includes the right to do all of the following EXCEPT
1 riot.
0 parade.
0 protest.
0 picket.
0 demonstrate. 

In the case of ________, the Supreme Court ruled that requiring an organization to turn overits membership lists was an unconstitutional restriction on freedom of association.
0 Planned Parenthood v. Casey
1 NAACP v. Alabama
0 Near v. Minnesota
0 Mapp v. Ohio
0 United States v. Communist Party 


In the case of NAACP v. Alabama (1958), the Supreme Court ruled that
0 Alabama could not require segregated schools.
0 the First Amendment's freedom of assembly does not include freedom of association.
1 the state of Alabama was unlawfully restricting the NAACP's freedom of association.
0 picketing in residential neighborhoods can be restricted.
0 the NAACP had to turn over its membership list to the government. 


Most of the wording of the Bill of Rights concerns
1 the rights of people accused of crimes.
0 the right to bear arms.
0 freedom of religion and the establishment clause.
0 freedom of speech and freedom of the press.
0 freedoms of expression. 

The rights of accused persons included in the Bill of Rights were originally intended to protectthe accused in
0 federal civil cases.
0 federal criminal cases.
0 local civil and criminal cases.
1 political arrests and trials.
0 police custody. 


Unreasonable searches and seizures are specifically forbidden in the
0 Sixteenth Amendment.
0 Fifth Amendment.
0 Second Amendment.
0 Tenth Amendment.
1 Fourth Amendment. 

To prevent abuse of police power, the Constitution requires that no court may issue ________unless probable cause exists to believe that a crime has occurred or is about to occur.
0 a writ of habeas corpus
0 a prior restraint
0 an exclusionary rule
1 a search warrant
0 any of the above 

Viewing the stages of the criminal justice system as a series of funnels of decreasing size tellsus that
0 most arrests result in a trial.
0 most trials result in a guilty verdict.
0 many more trials are held than prosecutions.
0 the likelihood of being punished decreases as one moves through the system.
1 many more arrests occur than trials. 

Unless they witness a crime, police officers cannot arrest a suspect without
0 due process.
0 a search warrant.
0 informing them of their Miranda rights.
1 probable cause.
0 a writ of habeas corpus. 


In the case of ________, the Supreme Court ruled that the protection against unreasonablesearch and seizure applied to the state and local governments, as well as the nationalgovernment, thus nationalizing the exclusionary rule.
0 Miranda v. Arizona
0 Gideon v. Wainwright
0 Roth v. United States
0 United States v. New York
1 Mapp v. Ohio 

Ever since 1914, the courts have used ________ to prevent illegally seized evidence from beingintroduced into the courtroom.
0 prior restraint
0 the Miranda rule
0 probable cause
0 search warrants
1 an exclusionary rule 


The Fifth Amendment forbids
0 cruel and unusual punishment.
1 forced self-incrimination.
0 illegal searches and seizures.
0 the government establishment of a national religion.
0 all of the above except D 

The ________ Amendment forbids forced self-incrimination, stating that no person   shall becompelled to be a witness against himself.  
0 First
0 Twenty-sixth
1 Fifth
0 Fourth
0 Ninth 

In the case of Miranda v. Arizona, the Supreme Court ruled that
0 illegally obtained evidence cannot be used in a trial.
1 police must inform any suspect of a series of rights, including the constitutional right to remain silent.
0 the death penalty could be imposed for the most extreme of crimes.
0 defendants in all felony cases have a right to counsel, even if the state has to provide such legal assistance.
0 the police must show probable cause before making an arrest. 

In what case did the Supreme Court rule that suspects must be told of their constitutionalrights to remain silent, that what they say can be used against them, and of their right to havean attorney present during any questioning?
0 Gideon v. Wainwright
0 Near v. Minnesota
0 Plucennik v. United States
1 Miranda v. Arizona
0 Mapp v. Ohio 



Fifth Amendment rights were expanded to include guidelines for police interrogationprocedures in the famous case of
0 California v. Simpson.
0 Dennis v. United States.
0 Gideon v. Wainwright.
1 Miranda v. Arizona.
0 Mapp v. Ohio. 

The Miranda Rule
0 has been strengthened by the Court in recent years.
0 was openly welcomed by police departments throughout the country.
0 has made police interrogations easier.
0 was based on the probable cause clause of the Fourth Amendment.
1 has required all police officers to inform accused persons of their rights. 

Today, courts must provide a lawyer for a defendant
1 whenever imprisonment could be imposed.
0 only in felony cases or where civil fines exceeding $10,000 could be levied.
0 whenever they plead not guilty.
0 only in capital cases where the punishment would be execution.
0 immediately after being arrested. 

In the 1963 case of ________, the Supreme Court ruled that defendants in all felony cases had aright to counsel, and if they could not afford to hire a lawyer, one must be provided.
0 Mapp v. Ohio
0 Engel v. Vitale
1 Gideon v. Wainwright
0 Miranda v. Arizona
0 National Bar Association v. United States 

According to the Constitution and the Bill of Rights, how many members should there be on ajury?
0 a minimum of six
0 a minimum of twelve
0 between six and twelve
0 a maximum of twelve
1 no specifications are made as to jury size 

Most criminal cases are settled in
0 the Supreme Court.
1 plea bargaining.
0 municipal and county courts.
0 district court.
0 the jury room. 

The Supreme Court case of Gideon v. Wainwright
1 extended the right to counsel to everyone accused of a felony.
0 prohibited government officials from issuing gag orders to the media.
0 ruled that illegally seized evidence can not be used in court.
0 gave only those accused of capital crimes the right to counsel.
0 set guidelines for police questioning of suspects. 

The Sixth Amendment right to counsel in federal courts was expanded in the famous 1963Supreme Court case of
0 Gregg v. Georgia.
1 Gideon v. Wainwright.
0 Arizona v. the United States.
0 Mapp v. Ohio.
0 Miranda v. Arizona. 

Most cases are settled through
1 plea bargaining.
0 paupers ¹ petitions.
0 judicial tribunals.
0 trial by a judge.
0 trial by jury. 

The Eighth Amendment to the Constitution
0 is the freedom of privacy.
1 forbids cruel and unusual punishment.
0 is the right to bear arms.
0 grants women equal rights including the right to vote.
0 protects freedom of assembly. 

What was the Supreme Court's decision in Hamdam v. Rumsfeld?
0 Terrorists are not entitled to protection by the Bill of Rights.
1 The procedures for trying prisoners at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba were insufficient for ensuring a fair trial.
0 The Geneva Convention does not apply because the   enemy combatants   are not soldiers in a recognized army.
0 The president has   inherent power   to fight the war on terror as he sees fit. Therefore, the president can establish judicial procedures on his own.
0 all of the above 

Cruel and unusual punishment is forbidden by the
0 self-incrimination clause.
0 Sixth Amendment.
1 Eighth Amendment.
0 exclusionary clause.
0 Fifth Amendment. 


In Gregg v. Georgia (1976), concerning applications of the Eighth Amendment, the SupremeCourt ruled that
0 only the federal government, and not the states, can impose the death penalty.
0 execution by electrocution is cruel and unusual punishment.
0 Georgia's death penalty law was   freakish   and   random.  
1 capital punishment is an extreme sanction, but it is suitable to the most extreme of crimes.
0 the death penalty constitutes cruel and unusual punishment. 

Which of the following is NOT protected in the First Amendment?
1 right to privacy
0 right of people to petition the government for a redress of grievances
0 no establishment of religion
0 freedom of speech
0 freedom of the press 

Where is the right to privacy found in the Constitution?
0 Tenth Amendment
0 First Amendment
0 Sixth Amendment
0 Ninth Amendment
1 none of the above 

Which of the following is NOT specifically stated in the Bill of Rights?
1 right to privacy
0 protection against double jeopardy
0 right to bear arms
0 freedom of speech
0 All of these are specifically stated. 


The Supreme Court's Roe v. Wade decision was issued in
0 1979.
0 1954.
1 1973.
0 1991.
0 1985. 

The Supreme Court ruled in its Roe v. Wade decision that
0 each state and not the federal government has authority to determine whether to permit or prohibit abortion in that state.
0 all restrictions on abortions at any stage of a pregnancy were a violation of a woman's right to privacy.
0 abortion was murder.
0 abortion was to be allowed only in cases of rape or incest, or when the life of the pregnant woman was in danger.
1 abortion could not be prohibited by any state during the first trimester of pregnancy. 

Since its Roe v. Wade decision, the Supreme Court has
1 generally moved to allow states more room to regulate abortions (e.g., waiting periods) than was true in Roe.
0 not moved an inch from its dramatic original ruling.
0 greatly extended the right of a woman to make her own decision about terminating her pregnancy.
0 reversed itself within the last few years, and has now overturned the Roe decision.
0 been silent on the politically divisive issue of abortion. 

The idea that the Constitution guarantees a right to privacy was first enunciated in
1 Griswold v. Connecticut.
0 Marbury v. Madison.
0 Roe v. Wade.
0 Webster v. Reproductive Health Services.
0 Planned Parenthood v. Casey. 

The right to privacy was applied to the states by the Supreme Court case of
0 Gitlow v. New York.
0 Gitlow, Near & Mapp v. the States.
0 Mapp v. Ohio.
0 Near v. Minnesota.
1 Griswold v. Connecticut. 

The most important application of privacy rights has come in the area of
1 abortion.
0 birth control.
0 sexual preference.
0 pornography.
0 the death penalty. 

The Supreme Court case of Roe v. Wade (1973) ruled that
0 abortions are not protected under the Constitution.
1 a state cannot forbid abortions during the first trimester of pregnancy.
0 a state cannot regulate abortions under any circumstances.
0 family planning services cannot provide women any abortion counseling.
0 states must permit abortions on demand during all nine months of pregnancy. 

The abortion decision in Roe v. Wade (1973) was justified by the Supreme Court largely on thegrounds of
0 the freedom of religion clause of the First Amendment.
0 the free exercise clause of the First Amendment.
1 the right of privacy implied in the Bill of Rights.
0 our constitutional right to life.
0 new advances in medical technology. 




Civil liberties
0 reflect the wishes of the majority.
0 never conflict with each other.
0 make government less democratic.
1 limit what the majority can ask the government to do.
0 were established in the 1960s. 

Civil liberties relating to defendants ¹ rights have often been used to
0 break up factions.
0 enhance the power of the courts
0 enhance diversity.
1 protect individual rights.
0 gain a plea bargain. 



Policies that extend basic rights to groups historically subject to discrimination are known as
1 civil rights.
0 civil liberties.
0 human rights.
0 suffrage.
0 affirmative action. 

Civil rights
0 is the other term for civil liberties.
1 are policies that extend basic rights to groups historically subject to discrimination.
0 involve the principles of criminal justice.
0 consist of legal and constitutional protections against the government.
0 can be divided into the great political freedoms and protections at the bar of justice. 

The phrase   all men are created equal   comes from the
0 Bill of Rights.
0 Constitution.
0 famous pamphlet, Common Sense.
1 Declaration of Independence.
0 Bible. 

The concept that everyone should have the same chance is called equality of
0 distribution.
0 fate.
0 rewards.
0 results.
1 opportunity. 

American society generally emphasizes equal
0 pay for equal work.
0 results.
0 rewards.
0 distribution.
1 opportunity. 

Which of the following statements is TRUE?
0 The American Revolution was fought principally in the name of equality.
1 The delegates to the Constitutional Convention did not resolve the tension between slavery and the principles of the Declaration of Independence.
0 Women's rights were hotly debated at the Constitutional Convention.
0 Most colonists were eager to defend slavery.
0 all of the above 

Thomas Jefferson, who wrote in the Declaration of Independence   We hold these truths to beself evident, that all men are created equal,   believed
0 that slavery was immoral.
0 in the principle of equal rewards.
1 that blacks were genetically inferior to whites.
0 that there were no differences among human beings.
0 that all people are created equal at birth, but become unequal over time. 

The Fourteenth Amendment was one of three passed
0 during the 1960s.
1 directly following the Civil War.
0 during George Washington's administration.
0 during the Depression of the 1930s.
0 right after the Revolutionary War. 

The Fourteenth Amendment specifically forbids the states from denying to anyone
0 freedom on the basis of race.
0 freedom of privacy.
0 the right to vote on the basis of race.
1 equal protection of the laws.
0 the right to vote on the basis of sex. 

The first and only place in which the idea of equality appears in the Constitution is in the
1 Fourteenth Amendment.
0 Ninth Amendment.
0 Preamble.
0 First Amendment.
0 Declaration of Independence. 

The concept of equality before the law was introduced to the Constitution in the
1 Fourteenth Amendment.
0 Preamble.
0 Fifteenth Amendment.
0 Sixteenth Amendment.
0 Thirteenth Amendment. 

Over the last 100 years, the provisions of the Fourteenth Amendment have become the vehiclefor
0 extending the right to vote to non-whites, women, and 18-year-olds.
1 expansive constitutional interpretation to outlaw arbitrary classifications which deny equality under the law.
0 limiting the national government's ability to interfere in matters affecting individual states.
0 government regulation of business and industry.
0 all of the above 

Standards of review used by the Supreme Court in discrimination cases include all of thefollowing EXCEPT
0 inherently suspect.
1 more than reasonable.
0 reasonable.
0 intermediate, between reasonable and inherently suspect.
0 cautious. 

The courts have recently ruled that, under the Fourteenth Amendment, racial and ethnicclassifications by states in regard to any matter
0 are reasonable.
0 are unconstitutional.
1 are inherently suspect.
0 are not the proper business of the federal courts to consider, but are up to the states individually.
0 are arbitrary, but usually reasonable. 

Classifications by race and ethnicity have now been ruled by the Court to be acceptable only in
0 matters wherein certain races or ethnic groups show greater talent or less aptitude.
0 laws passed by Congress, not those passed by the individual states.
0 regard to rules and regulations of the armed forces.
1 laws seeking to remedy previous discrimination.
0 matters involving national security. 


The Supreme Court has ruled that racial and ethnic classifications are
0 legal if they are reasonable.
0 not covered by the Fourteenth Amendment.
1 inherently suspect.
0 never permissible.
0 exempt from the constitutional penumbras of the Bill of Rights. 

Classifications based on gender have been ruled to be ________ by the decisions of the Courtin the past several years.
0 reasonable
0 strictly unconstitutional
0 sexist
0 inherently suspect
1 somewhere between inherently suspect and reasonable 

The first African immigrants to America were
0 clergy.
0 small shopkeepers.
1 kidnap victims.
0 farmers.
0 Nigerian ivory traders. 

Today the equal protection clause is interpreted broadly enough to do all of the followingEXCEPT
0 reapportion state legislatures.
0 prohibit job discrimination.
1 permit sexual harassment.
0 forbid racial segregation in the public schools.
0 none of the above 

In the case of ________, the Supreme Court ruled that a black man, slave or free, was   chattel  and had no rights under a white man's government; it also ruled that Congress had no powerto ban slavery in the western territories.
0 Plessy v. Ferguson
0 Craig v. Boren
1 Dred Scott v. Sandford
0 Brown v. Board of Education
0 Amos v. Colorado 


The Dred Scott v. Sandford ruling was handed down by the Supreme Court
0 a few years after the Civil War.
0 in 1896.
0 during the Civil War.
0 in the 1950s.
1 a few years prior to the Civil War. 

The ________ Amendment outlawed slavery in the United States.
1 Thirteenth
0 Nineteenth
0 Tenth
0 First
0 Equal Rights 

The Thirteenth Amendment
1 forbade slavery and involuntary servitude.
0 gave African Americans the right to vote.
0 repealed the Twelfth Amendment.
0 established the principle of separate but equal.
0 repealed Prohibition. 

The Thirteenth Amendment was passed
0 in 1920.
0 in 1850.
0 in the 1960s.
0 as one of the original Bill of Rights.
1 at the end of the Civil War. 

The constitutional trail for securing equal rights for all Americans was blazed primarily by
0 women.
0 Hispanic Americans.
0 Asian Americans.
0 the American Indians.
1 African Americans. 

In Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857), Chief Justice Taney declared that
0 the importation of slaves into the United States was illegal, but slavery itself was not.
1 Congress had no authority to ban slavery in the territories.
0 a slave who had escaped to a free state became a free man.
0 slavery is inherently unconstitutional.
0 slavery can be practiced in the so-called free states. 

Slavery was declared unconstitutional by the
1 Thirteenth Amendment.
0 Fourteenth Amendment.
0 Jim Crow laws.
0 Bill of Rights.
0 Dred Scott v. Sandford Supreme Court case. 

Jim Crow laws were those which
1 were enacted by Southern whites in the late nineteenth century to segregate African Americans from whites.
0 the North enforced in the South in the Reconstruction era following the Civil War, granting rights to former slaves.
0 sought to end segregation and bring the races into closer contact with one another.
0 justified slavery and set codes for slaves ¹ behavior.
0 established slavery and contract law regulating the slave trade. 

The Supreme Court's decision in the case of Plessy v. Ferguson
0 for the first time established race as a suspect classification and ruled that former slaves must be granted land or otherwise compensated for their years of forced labor.
0 outlawed slavery.
1 stated that the principle of separate but equal public facilities for African Americans was constitutional.
0 stated that the principle of separate but equal public facilities for African Americans was unconstitutional.
0 ruled that slaves were chattel property and entitled to no rights under the Constitution. 

In the case of ________, the Supreme Court ruled that segregation of races by law wasconstitutional so long as the facilities that were separate were also equal.
0 Amos v. Alabama
0 Brown v. Board of Education
1 Plessy v. Ferguson
0 Craig v. Boren
0 Dred Scott v. Sandford 


In the case of Plessy v. Ferguson,
0 housing discrimination was forbidden.
0 the principle of   separate but equal   was overturned.
0 school busing was allowed to remedy racial segregation.
0 United States citizenship and all rights that go with it were granted to former slaves.
1 the principle of   separate but equal   was used to justify segregation. 

During the first half of the twentieth century, the Supreme Court
1 paid more attention to the   separate   than to the   equal   part of the separate but equal doctrine.
0 allowed segregation in the armed forces.
0 upheld the legality of all-white primaries.
0 declared all Jim Crow laws unconstitutional.
0 all of the above 

Legal segregation of the races was declared unconstitutional in the 1954 landmark rulingknown as
0 King v. University of Kansas.
0 Plessy v. Ferguson.
0 Dred Scott v. Sandford.
0 Craig v. Boren.
1 none of the above 

The Brown v. Board of Education decision overturned the Supreme Court's 1896 ruling in
0 Craig v. Boren.
0 Dred Scott v. Sandford.
0 Marbury v. Madison.
0 Amos v. Alabama.
1 Plessy v. Ferguson. 

In Brown v. Board of Education (1954), the Supreme Court
0 ordered the Topeka school district to spend more money on black schools.
0 enunciated the principle of equal but separate.
0 ruled that the visible signs of education were substantially equal between black schools and white ones.
0 enunciated the principle of separate but equal.
1 ruled that school segregation was inherently unequal. 

The Supreme Court's ruling in Brown v. Board of Education was based on the legal argumentthat segregation violated the ________ Amendment.
1 Fourteenth
0 First
0 Twenty-sixth
0 Nineteenth
0 Equal Rights 


De jure educational segregation occurs
0 by constitutional amendment.
1 by law.
0 by forced school busing to integrate the races.
0 by the reality of neighborhood schools located in areas that happen to be racially segregated.
0 from day-to-day depending on changing enrollments at a particular school. 

In the case of ________, the Supreme Court upheld federal court rulings ordering busing ofstudents to achieve racially balanced schools.
0 Craig v. Boren
0 Plessy v. Ferguson
0 Brown v. Board of Education
0 Unified Transportation Co. v Madison County
1 Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenberg County Schools 


After Brown v. Board of Education (1954), school integration in the South
0 was unaffected by the decision.
0 ended abruptly.
0 was completed within three years.
0 never changed.
1 proceeded very slowly. 


The one institution most responsible for putting civil rights goals on the nation's policy agendawas
0 Congress.
0 the presidency.
1 the courts.
0 the political parties.
0 the state governments. 

All of the following were tactics of the Civil Rights Movement EXCEPT
0 marches.
0 civil disobedience.
0 sit-ins.
0 bus boycotts.
1 none of the above 

The Civil Rights Act of ________, the most important law since the EmancipationProclamation, made racial discrimination illegal in public accommodations throughoutAmerica.
0 1947
1 1964
0 1984
0 1974
0 1954 

The ________ Amendment, adopted in 1870, guaranteed the right of African Americans to voteî€„at least in principle.
0 Nineteenth
0 Thirteenth
0 First
1 Fifteenth
0 Fifth 

The Civil Rights Act of 1964
0 made racial discrimination illegal in places of public accommodation.
0 forbade discrimination in employment on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, or gender.
0 prohibited gender discrimination in the work place.
1 both A and B
0 neither A nor B 

Suffrage refers to
0 the practice of de facto slavery rather than de jure slavery.
0 the legal segregation of the races or of men and women in hotels, motels, restaurants, and other public places.
0 the hardships endured to obtain civil rights for African Americans and equal rights for women.
1 the legal right to vote.
0 the practice of shackling slaves working in fields so they could not run away. 

The legal right to vote is referred to as
0 civil liberties.
0 the grandfather clause.
0 civil rights.
1 suffrage.
0 coverture. 


The grandfather clause was ________ by the Supreme Court in the 1915 decision,  Guinn v.United States.
0 overlooked
0 established
0 declared age discrimination
1 found unconstitutional and outlawed
0 upheld as constitutional 

The Civil Rights Act of 1964
0 established the first affirmative action programs.
0 ended discrimination in the purchase or rental of housing.
0 ended the white primary.
0 guaranteed minority groups the right to vote.
1 guaranteed equal access to hotels, restaurants, and other public accommodations. 

Blacks were first given the legal right to vote by the
0 Civil Rights Act of 1964.
0 Twenty-fourth Amendment.
1 Fifteenth Amendment.
0 Voting Rights Act of 1965.
0 Emancipation Proclamation. 

To render African-American votes ineffective, several southern states used the ________, adevice that permitted political parties to choose their nominees in elections off limits to blacks.
0 suffrage
0 grandfather clause
0 poll tax
0 hidden ballot
1 white primary 

The Twenty-fourth Amendment, ratified in 1964,
0 prohibited discrimination in employment or public accommodations based on race.
0 granted Negroes the right to vote.
0 outlawed the use of literacy tests in order to register to vote.
0 outlawed the grandfather clause and the white primary.
1 prohibited the use of poll taxes in federal elections. 

Poll taxes for federal elections were outlawed in the
0 Voting Rights Act.
0 Civil Rights Act of 1964.
0 Supreme Court's Guinn v. United States decision of 1915.
1 Twenty-fourth Amendment.
0 Tax Reform Act of 1963. 

One consequence of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 was
1 dramatic increase in the number of African Americans registered to vote.
0 increased access of blacks to public accommodations.
0 the increased use of gerrymandering.
0 decreased involvement of federal officials in state election procedures.
0 an increase in segregation. 

The white primary
0 was the examination voters had to pass before being allowed to vote, designed to prevent blacks from voting because they had been denied educational opportunities.
0 denied blacks the right to run for office in primary elections in the South.
1 excluded blacks from primary elections, thus depriving them of a voice in the real electoral contests in the South.
0 denied blacks the right to vote in all southern elections.
0 allowed blacks to vote only in Republican primaries in the heavily Democratic South. 

Native-American Indians were made citizens of the United States in
0 1964.
1 1924.
0 1789.
0 1868.
0 They were never made citizens of the United States. 

Which of the following statements about Native Americans is FALSE?
0 Native Americans are the oldest minority group in the United States.
0 Native Americans are guaranteed access to the polls, housing, and to jobs.
1 Native Americans were made citizens of the United States long before African Americans received the same status.
0 The Indian Claims Act of 1946 established a means to settle financial disputes arising from lands taken from the Indians.
0 Native Americans are the poorest minority group in the United States. 

Hispanic Americans comprise approximately ________ percent of the United Statespopulation.
1 14
0 5
0 22
0 10
0 20 

The fastest growing minority group in the United States is
0 Native Americans.
0 African Americans.
0 Japanese Americans.
0 Hispanic Americans.
1 Asian Americans. 


The Supreme Court case of Korematsu v. United States (1944)
1 upheld the constitutionality of the internment of Japanese Americans during World War II.
0 ruled that public discrimination against Japanese Americans is unconstitutional.
0 set the stage for the extension of equal rights to Japanese Americans.
0 awarded benefits to Japanese Americans interned during World War II.
0 upheld the prohibition of the ownership of land by people of Japanese descent. 

The women's rights movement was launched with the signing of the
0 Feminist Manifesto.
0 Emancipation Proclamation.
1 Seneca Falls Declaration.
0 Equal Rights Amendment.
0 Declaration of Independence. 


The Nineteenth Amendment
1 gave women the constitutional right to vote.
0 outlawed the poll tax in federal elections.
0 repealed Prohibition.
0 gave African Americans the constitutional right to vote.
0 ended slavery. 

The ________ gave women the constitutional right to vote.
0 Bill of Rights
0 Fifteenth Amendment
0 Twenty-fourth Amendment
0 Equal Rights Amendment
1 Nineteenth Amendment 

From about 1920-1960, the feminist movement
0 experienced great growth and activity.
1 was in a period of hibernation.
0 was preoccupied with winning the right to vote.
0 concentrated on anti-war causes.
0 first coalesced as a significant political movement in the United States. 

Alice Paul authored the Equal Rights Amendment, and unsuccessfully pushed for its passagebeginning in the
0 1960s.
0 1970s.
1 1920s.
0 1980s.
0 1940s. 

Women were first given the right to vote by the
0 Suffrage Act of 1880.
0 Equal Rights Amendment.
0 Fifteenth Amendment.
0 Voting Rights Act.
1 Nineteenth Amendment. 

Which of the following statements about the immediate consequence of women receiving theright to vote is FALSE?
0 Many supporters of the right to vote accepted the traditional model of the family.
1 The feminist movement gained steam immediately after the right to vote was secured.
0 Winning the right to vote did not automatically give women equal rights, pay, and status.
0 Many state laws continued to enshrine the traditional view of the family in public policy.
0 Gaining the right to vote did not eliminate many of the challenges facing women. 

After passage of the Nineteenth Amendment in 1920, public policy toward women wasdominated by
1 protectionism.
0 the principle of equality.
0 coverture.
0 matriarchalism.
0 economic, but not political, advances. 

The feminist movement was reborn
0 when women became involved in the war effort during World War II.
0 when the Supreme Court made its decision in Roe v. Wade.
0 after the Civil War when women became inspired by the emancipation of the slaves.
1 during the Civil Rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s.
0 when the Equal Rights Amendment was first introduced in the 1920s. 

Betty Friedan's book, ________, published in 1963, encouraged many women to questiontraditional assumptions and to assert their rights.
0 A Handmaid's Tale
0 The Second Sex
0 The Female Eunuch
0 Women and Economics
1 The Feminine Mystique 

In ________, the Supreme Court ruled that any   arbitrary   sex -based classification violated theequal protection clause.
0 Regents of the University of California v. Bakke
0 Dred Scott v. Sandford
0 Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenberg County Schools
1 Reed v. Reed
0 Roe v. Wade 

In the case of Craig v. Boren, the Supreme Court ruled that
0 sex classifications would be treated by the Court as inherently suspect.
0 racial classifications were constitutional if they have a compelling, legitimate, and rational purpose.
1 it would employ a   medium scrutiny   standard: sex discrimination would be treated as neither valid nor invalid.
0 sex classifications would be treated by the Court as valid.
0 all sex classifications were unconstitutional. 


The Supreme Court has voided each of the following sexual discrimination laws EXCEPT lawsthat
0 provided for alimony payments to women only.
1 made statutory rape a crime for men only.
0 set a higher age for drinking for men than for women.
0 closed a state's nursing school to men.
0 provided child support for women only. 

Which of the following is TRUE?
1 Many sex discrimination cases have involved men seeking equality with women.
0 The Supreme Court first struck down a law on the basis of sex discrimination in 1920.
0 The Supreme Court has so far struck down only a handful of laws for discriminating on the basis of gender.
0 All of these are true.
0 None of these are true. 

The Equal Rights Amendment failed because
0 it was vetoed by the President.
0 the Supreme Court voided it as unconstitutional.
0 it did not win the required two-thirds vote in each chamber of Congress.
0 it was rejected by the United States Senate.
1 it fell three states short of sufficient ratification. 

The ________ banned gender discrimination in employment by law.
1 Civil Rights Act of 1964
0 Fair Labor Standards Act
0 Supreme Court ruling in National Organization for Women v. Bank of America
0 Nineteenth Amendment
0 Gender Equity Act of 1972 


Which of the following statements about the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) is FALSE?
1 The ERA was ratified in 1982.
0 The ERA battle stimulated vigorous feminist activity.
0 The ERA battle stimulated vigorous anti-feminist activity.
0 The ERA was first introduced in the 1920s.
0 Congress passed the ERA in 1972. 

The United States Supreme Court has handed down each of the following decisionsconcerning gender discrimination in employment and business activity EXCEPT
1 requiring the federal government to give women equal pay for jobs of comparable worth.
0 prohibiting gender discrimination in private business and service clubs.
0 voiding laws and rules barring women from jobs through arbitrary height and weight requirements.
0 protecting women from being required to take mandatory pregnancy leaves from their jobs.
0 None of the above; the court has handed down each of the decisions above. 

The issue of ________ deals with women seeking to redress the fact that jobs traditionally heldby men tend to pay far greater salaries than jobs requiring similar skills but are traditionallyheld by women.
0 gender equality
0 affirmative action
0 feminized wage scales
1 comparable worth
0 the lace purse 

  Comparable worth   refers to the issue of
1 paying men and women equivalent salaries for jobs requiring similar skills.
0 government subsidization of women who choose to work at home.
0 the inherent dignity and equality of women with men.
0 reduced work responsibilities for women workers with children.
0 equal voting rights and access to public office for women. 

Which of the following is TRUE?
0 Women are prohibited from serving as combat pilots.
0 Women are prohibited on navy warships.
0 Women are now allowed in ground combat units.
0 Both men and women must register for the draft at age 18.
1 none of the above 

Which of the following statements about women in the military is FALSE?
0 Congress has opened all the service academies to women.
1 Women, as well as men, are now required to register for the draft.
0 Statutes and regulations prohibit women from serving in most combat situations.
0 Women have served in every branch of the armed services since World War II.
0 Women do not have a ceiling on the rank they can achieve. 

The Persian Gulf War showed that
1 women could serve as combat pilots.
0 women would not volunteer for combat positions.
0 there is no place in the military for women.
0 women did well in the military, but should not serve in combat positions.
0 women's military performance was inferior to men's. 

In 1993, the Supreme Court ruled that sexual harassment is sex discrimination that violates theCivil Rights Act when
0 the target objects a second time to touching, body language, or dirty talk.
0 it causes severe psychological injury.
1 the workplace environment becomes hostile or abusive.
0 an employee can no longer perform his or her job.
0 the target suffers a nervous breakdown. 

In Faragher v. City of Boca Raton (1998), the Supreme Court held that
0 school districts can be held liable for sexual harassment.
0 the military can not be responsible for sexual harassment at conferences.
1 employers are responsible for preventing and eliminating sexual harassment.
0 government entities are not responsible for preventing sexual harassment.
0 none of the above 


The 1991 convention of the Tailhook Association convention brought attention to the problemof
0 the failure of the Equal Rights Amendment.
0 homosexual activity in the armed services.
0 comparable worth.
1 sexual harassment.
0 sexual discrimination in the courts. 

The   gray liberation   movement refers to
0 elderly homosexuals seeking equality.
0 those seeking laws that break down racial barriers and promote harmony.
0 anti-pollution activists who seek to reduce smog.
1 those fighting for the rights of the elderly.
0 those fighting for equal rights and justice for the disabled. 

The fastest growing age group in the American population is
0 Generation X.
1 people in their 80s.
0 infants.
0 teenagers.
0 baby-boomers. 

Age discrimination laws have
0 allowed children between the ages of 12 and 18 to leave their parents.
0 lowered the minimum compulsory retirement age to 55.
0 required employers to hire a certain percentage of people over the age of 50.
1 denied federal funds to any institution discriminating against people over forty.
0 all of the above 

In 1990, Congress enacted the ________, a far-reaching law to protect a particular group ofAmericans from discrimination, ignoring those who claimed the price tag would be too high.
0 Gay and Lesbian Civil Rights Bill
0 Native-Americans Inclusion Act
1 Americans with Disabilities Act
0 Children's Rights Act
0 Immigrant Grant Act 

The Rehabilitation Act of 1973
0 entitles all children to a free public education appropriate to their needs.
0 increased the amount of financial aid to disabled people.
0 guaranteed free, lifetime medical care and physical therapy for Vietnam War veterans.
1 added handicapped people to the list of Americans protected from discrimination.
0 prohibits employment discrimination against the disabled. 

The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
0 required all governmental buildings to have wheelchair-accessible entrances and facilities.
0 added AIDS victims to the list of handicapped persons.
1 prohibited employment discrimination against the disabled.
0 added handicapped people to the list of Americans protected from discrimination.
0 required an affirmative action program for the disabled. 

Opposition to Civil Rights laws for the handicapped has been justified primarily on the basisof the
0 inability of disabled persons to handle most employment requirements.
0 fear that laws will lead to a quota system to hire disabled persons.
1 high cost of programs to help the disabled.
0 fear that the disabled will take jobs away from able-bodied persons.
0 all of the above 

Homophobia refers to
1 fear and hatred toward gay men and lesbian women.
0 the tendency to be sexually attracted to members of one's own sex.
0 the development of positive stereotypes concerning gay men and lesbian women.
0 promoting the Civil Rights of gay men and lesbian women.
0 an attitude of tolerance and acceptance toward gay men and lesbian women. 

Affirmative action seeks to move beyond
0 equal results to equal opportunity.
1 equal opportunity to equal results.
0 equal opportunity to equal rights.
0 equal rights to equal opportunity.
0 negativism to positivism in human relations. 

The public policy paths for women and minorities converged in the debate about
1 affirmative action.
0 the Equal Rights Amendment.
0 military service.
0 gay rights.
0 comparable worth. 

The goal of affirmative action is to move toward
0 equal facilities.
0 equal opportunity.
1 equal results.
0 equal pay.
0 comparable worth. 

The strongest and most controversial form of affirmative action is
0 busing.
0 comparable worth.
1 numerical quotas.
0 comparative worth.
0 equal opportunity. 

The Supreme Court ruled against some of the basic principles of affirmative action in which ofthe following cases?
0 Metro Broadcasting Inc. v. Federal Communications Commission
0 Fullilove v. Klutznick
1 Regents of the University of California v. Bakke
0 United Steelworkers of America, AFL-CIO v. Weber
0 all of the above 

Which of the following statements about affirmative action is FALSE?
0 The constitutional status of affirmative action has not been very clear.
0 Affirmative action puts an emphasis on equal results and not merely equal opportunities.
0 Affirmative action has been used to establish special provisions to ensure that a portion of school admissions go to minorities and women.
1 Polling data shows that most Americans support affirmative action.
0 none of the above 

The case of Regents of the University of California v. Bakke dealt with
1 affirmative action.
0 sexual harassment.
0 the right to establish a gay student organization.
0 comparable worth.
0 paid maternity leave. 


In the case of ________, the Supreme Court ruled that affirmative action programs were notunconstitutional, but they could not involve a set-aside quota of spots available only tomembers of particular groups.
0 Craig v. Boren
0 Korematsu v. United States
1 Regents of the University of California v. Bakke
0 Reed v. Reed
0 Roe v. Wade 


In the case of Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, the Court
0 refused to allow the admission of Bakke to University of California-Davis.
0 was united in its decision.
0 ordered that University of California-Davis could not use race as a criterion for admission.
0 ruled that nursing schools cannot discriminate against men in their admissions procedures.
1 ruled that a public university could not set aside a quota of spots for particular groups. 

Which of the following statements about Supreme Court rulings concerning affirmative actionis FALSE?
0 The Court has approved preferential treatment of minorities in promotions.
1 The Court has ruled that affirmative action can exempt recently hired minorities from traditional work rules specifying   last hired, first fired   order of layoffs.
0 The Court has ordered quotas for minority union memberships.
0 The Court has ruled that public employers may use affirmative action promotion plans to counter the underrepresentation of women and minorities in the workplace.
0 none of the above 

Affirmative action programs are referred to by critics as
0 negative reaction.
1 reverse discrimination.
0 positive negativism.
0 comparable worth.
0 degenderizing. 

Supporters of affirmative action believe that
1 affirmative action produces so important a social goal that some reverse discrimination is acceptable.
0 merit is the only fair basis for distributing benefits.
0 discrimination is wrong, even when its purpose is to rectify past injustices.
0 any form of quota system is unjust.
0 some discrimination is acceptable. 

When proposition 209 was passed in California in 1996, it banned
1 affirmative action in public hiring, contracting, and educational admissions.
0 affirmative action in federal hiring.
0 affirmative action on behalf of homosexuals.
0 affirmative action in the private sector.
0 affirmative action on behalf of women. 

Which of the following statements is FALSE?
0 Civil rights policies have expanded the power of government.
0 The steady expansion of civil rights has brought more groups into the democratic process.
1 Current civil rights policies conform to the eighteenth-century idea of limited government.
0 The rights ensured by the First Amendment are essential to a democracy.
0 Lyndon Johnson was president when civil rights legislation was passed in the 1960s. 


The science of population changes is
0 polling.
0 anthropology.
0 popuology.
1 demography.
0 the census. 

The most valuable method for understanding demographic changes in America is the
0 Statistical Abstract of the United States.
0 public opinion poll.
1 census.
0 turnout in presidential elections.
0 Internal Revenue Service statistical tax abstracts. 

________ is the distribution of the population's beliefs about politics and policy issues.
0 Random sampling
0 Direct mail
0 Political socialization
1 Public opinion
0 Political ideology 

Which of the following statements about the American people is FALSE?
0 There are about 295 million Americans.
1 Most Americans view cultural diversity as one of the least appealing aspects of their society.
0 America is one of the most culturally diverse countries in the world.
0 America was founded on the principle of tolerating diversity.
0 none of the above 

The science of population changes is called
0 public opinion.
1 demography.
0 political science.
0 census.
0 popuology. 

Public opinion is defined in the text as
0 opinions which are expressible in public, as opposed to the more truthful private opinions which most individuals are reluctant to state publicly.
0 beliefs about government held by a majority of people.
0 opinions solicited from a random sample of the public.
1 the distribution of the population's beliefs about politics and policy.
0 widely held beliefs about the public's role in politics and policy. 

By constitutional requirement, the government conducts the United States Census every
0 two years.
0 year.
0 five years.
0 presidential election year.
1 ten years. 

The United States Constitution requires that the government conduct an   actual enumeration  of the population every
1 ten years.
0 25 years.
0 year.
0 five years.
0 presidential election year. 

The first census in the United States was conducted in
0 1900.
1 1790.
0 1970.
0 1850.
0 1800. 

An issue that became controversial regarding the 1990 census was
0 inclusion of immigrants.
0 cost of the census.
1 the undercount of minority groups.
0 the overcount of urbanites.
0 none of the above 

The 2000 census indicated that the largest minority population is comprised of
0 illegals.
0 African Americans.
0 Asian Americans.
1 Hispanics.
0 Native Americans. 

Approximately what percent of African Americans live below the poverty line?
0 28
0 42
1 25
0 6
0 17 

The largest racial/ethnic minority group in the United States is
0 African Americans.
0 Asian Americans.
0 Native Americans.
1 Hispanics.
0 African Americans and Hispanics are tied in size. 

Approximately what percent of Asian Americans hold a college degree?
0 32
1 49
0 12
0 22
0 60 

The least healthy, poorest, and least educated racial/ethnic group in the United States is
0 African Americans.
1 Native Americans.
0 Asian Americans.
0 Hispanics.
0 Caucasians. 

The most recent wave of immigration since World War II has consisted primarily of
0 Africans.
1 Hispanics and Asians.
0 northwestern Europeans.
0 southern and eastern Europeans.
0 refugees from communist countries. 

Demographic changes in the United States population could translate to political consequencesthrough the process of
0 political socialization.
0 political acculturation.
1 reapportionment.
0 political assimilation
0 none of the above 

The term   minority majority   refers to the fact that
0 the majority in America has always been a collection of minority ethnic groups.
0 minority groups have been able to impose their will upon the majority.
1 America will soon cease to have a white majority and together the minority groups will become a majority.
0 African Americans are the largest minority group in the United States.
0 Hispanic Americans will soon become the largest minority group in the United States. 

African Americans comprise what proportion of the American population?
0 about 30 percent
0 about 25 percent
1 about 12 percent
0 about 20 percent
0 about 5 percent 

Hispanics comprise approximately what percent of the American population?
1 13 percent
0 5 percent
0 23 percent
0 18 percent
0 28 percent 

The largest component of the minority majority is the
0 Asian population.
0 Caucasian population.
1 Hispanic population.
0 Native-American population.
0 African-American population. 

Which of the following statements is FALSE?
1 Hispanics are primarily concentrated in the rural areas.
0 In the 2000 Census, the Hispanic population outnumbered the African -American population.
0 African Americans have recently been exercising a good deal of political power.
0 about 24 percent of African Americans currently live under the poverty line.
0 none of the above 

Unlike Hispanics who have come to America to escape poverty, the recent influx of Asians hasbeen driven by
0 upper-class elites who feared political persecution.
0 civil wars.
1 a new class of professionals looking for greater opportunity.
0 ethnic minorities seeking refuge from human rights violations.
0 B and C only 

Native Americans tend to be
0 the poorest group in America.
0 the least educated group in America.
0 the least healthy group in America.
1 all of the above
0 none of the above 

The Simpson-Mazzoli Act
1 represented a crackdown on illegal aliens by requiring that employers document the citizenship or legitimate immigrant status of workers or pay stiff fines.
0 requires that states keep their polls open for at least ten hours on election day in order to facilitate participation.
0 established federal guidelines and regulations for taking public opinion polls.
0 reformed the jury procedures in felony cases, particularly the unanimous verdict requirement.
0 required that the homeless be counted in the 1990 census. 

The ________ Act required that as of 1987, employers document the citizenship or legalimmigrant status of their employees, or face substantial criminal penalties for failing to do so.
0 National Origins
1 Simpson-Mazzoli
0 National Labor Relations
0 Hatch
0 Immigrant Employment 

The least-healthy, the poorest, and the least-educated group in the American mosaic are the
0 Hispanic Americans.
0 Appalachian Caucasians.
1 Native-American Indians.
0 Asian Americans.
0 African Americans. 

The Simpson-Mazzoli Act
1 required employers to document the citizenship of their employees.
0 granted amnesty to all illegal aliens.
0 established a National Identification Card that all Americans will have to possess by the year 2000 in order to get employment.
0 placed a limit on the number of Mexican immigrants allowed in the United States per year.
0 required all immigrants to register with the Immigration and Naturalization Service. 

The worst off of America's minority groups are
1 Native Americans.
0 homosexuals.
0 Asian Americans.
0 African Americans.
0 Hispanic Americans. 

Political culture refers to
0 a set of beliefs about the role of government in society.
0 how truly   American   someone is.
1 an overall set of values widely shared within a society.
0 a high degree of homogeneity in political opinions.
0 political party affiliation. 

Over the last fifty years much of America's population growth has occurred
0 on the East Coast.
0 east of the Mississippi River.
0 north of the Mason-Dixon line.
1 in the West and South.
0 in the Midwest. 

Between 1990 and 2000,
0 states in the Southwest were losing population.
1 the Sunbelt continued to experience rapid population growth.
0 the Midwest became the fastest-growing region in the country.
0 the Frostbelt had begun to gain population again.
0 the Pacific Coast states were the fastest-growing region of the country. 

________ occurs after every census to reallocate the 435 seats in the United States House ofRepresentatives, reflecting shifts in the population of the states and, thus, how many seatseach state is allotted.
0 Equalization
0 Restructuring
0 Political socialization
1 Reapportionment
0 Demography 

Reapportionment occurs after every census to reallocate seats in
0 the Senate.
0 the president's cabinet.
0 the Supreme Court.
1 the House of Representatives.
0 both the House of Representatives and the Senate. 

Nationwide, the fastest growing age group is composed of
0 those under 13 years old.
0 one-year-olds.
0 those between 13-21 years old.
1 those over 65 years old.
0 those between 21-30 years old. 

Which of the following states has increased its representation in the House from just seven in1900 to 53 today?
0 Florida
0 Texas
0 New York
1 California
0 Georgia 

Reapportionment
1 can dramatically shift political power between the regions.
0 affects how much federal aid population groups can receive.
0 changes the states ¹ number of representatives in the United States Senate.
0 has most recently increased congressional representation for New England.
0 rarely occurs. 

The process through which an individual acquires his or her particular political orientations,including his or her knowledge, feelings, and evaluations regarding his or her political world,is known as
0 political orientation.
0 demography.
1 political socialization.
0 political ideology.
0 political indoctrination. 

One can predict how the majority of young people will vote simply by
1 knowing the political leaning of their parents.
0 knowing the political leaning of their friends.
0 knowing their race.
0 knowing the political leaning of their teachers.
0 knowing their age. 


The family's role in political socialization is central because
0 parents tend to purposively guide their children's political orientations.
0 of children's tendencies to rebel against parents and their beliefs.
0 the family puts emphasis on formal political education.
1 of its monopoly on time and emotional commitment.
0 all of the above 

Both authoritarian and democratic political systems seek to teach citizens, especially youth, thepositive aspects of their political systems because
0 youth are most gullible.
0 it enhances ruling elite's political power over the citizenry.
0 both types of political systems rely directly on citizen support.
1 youth will then grow up to be supportive citizens.
0 youth think alike. 

According to many observers,   the new parent   in the socialization process has become
0 schools.
0 interest groups.
1 the mass media.
0 the mother.
0 friends and peers. 

The most obvious intrusion of the government into America's socialization is through
0 political parties.
0 the family.
1 schooling.
0 the mass media.
0 criminal laws. 

Governments throughout the world use the schools to help with the ________ of youngpeople.
0 random sampling
1 political socialization
0 voter registration
0 civil disobedience
0 demography 

As one becomes more socialized with age, one's political orientations
0 become less important.
0 change as one's position in the aging order changes their life conditions.
1 grow firmer.
0 lack commitment.
0 fluctuate more. 

One of the effects of growing older on political learning and political behavior is that
1 political participation increases with age.
0 people become more liberal with age.
0 interest in politics decreases with age.
0 the strength of one's party attachment declines with age.
0 political ignorance increases with age. 

Public opinion polling was first begun in 1932 by
1 George Gallup.
0 the Democratic party.
0 Louis Harris.
0 the Associated Press.
0 Henry Luce. 


In public opinion polling, a sample as small as about ________ people can faithfully representthe   universe   of Americans.
0 10,000
1 1,500
0 20,000
0 5,000
0 50,000 

The key to the accuracy of public opinion polls is
0 political ideology.
0 polygraphs.
0 sampling error.
0 the larger the size of the sample, the better.
1 random sampling. 

Sampling error describes
0 how many samples a survey estimate is based on.
0 what percentage of the sample provided answers to the questions.
1 how close a sample estimate is to the real population value.
0 how often a sample statistic is correct.
0 how many samples are incorrect. 

Random sampling in public opinion polling operates on the principle that
0 which answers to include in aggregate poll results must be selected by chance in order to maximize accuracy.
1 everyone should have an equal probability of being selected.
0 the questions to be asked of a given respondent must be selected randomly so that all respondents are asked the same question the same number of times.
0 the larger the number of people who are polled, the greater accuracy of the poll.
0 both B and C 

Random sampling is considered
0 desirable, but not necessary, for an accurate poll of public opinion.
0 an unsophisticated way of measuring public opinion, but one that sometimes yields accurate results.
0 highly unreliable, but the cheapest way to measure public opinion.
1 the key to the accuracy of opinion polls.
0 a dangerous way to measure public opinion. 

The level of confidence about a public opinion poll is referred to as
0 the confidence index.
1 sampling error.
0 the sample.
0 random sampling.
0 demographic certainty. 



Public opinion polls are only estimates because
0 samples of fewer then one million people are too small.
1 all surveys have a sampling error.
0 pollsters sometimes have to make educated guesses about the results.
0 random digit dialing has replaced person-to-person interviewing.
0 samples are not representative. 

A pollster using a representative sample of 1,500 Americans finds that 52 percent supportcandidate X and 48 percent support candidate Y. The pollster's conclusion should be that
1 the race is too close to call because of a possible sampling error.
0 the poll should be retaken using random digit dialing.
0 the poll should be retaken with a larger sample.
0 polls are unreliable predictors of political outcomes.
0 X is likely to win. 

A random sample of 1500-2000 respondents will produce results far off the mark about________ of the time.
0 10 percent
0 25 percent
1 5 percent
0 35 percent
0 1 percent 

The 1936 Literary Digest poll underestimated the vote for President Franklin Roosevelt by 19percent because
1 the sample was drawn from telephone books and motor-vehicle records.
0 the literary intelligentsia as a group never did like Roosevelt.
0 the sample was too small.
0 not enough women were interviewed.
0 people did not tell the truth. 

Most polling today is done
0 by mail.
0 by computer modem and fax.
0 at shopping malls.
0 in person.
1 by phone. 

Samples of public opinion today are usually selected through
0 voter registration lists.
0 cities and towns throughout the country believed to be   bellwethers,   which accurately represent the entire nation.
0 selective respondent profiles.
1 random digit dialing.
0 phone books. 

Which of the following is NOT a criticism of modern polling?
0 Careful attention to polls is unwise, as polls only reflect the passive attitudes of voters.
0 Politicians use polls to follow the crowd rather than to assert bold leadership.
0 Polls can distort the election process by creating a bandwagon effect, where people want to follow the crowd.
1 Polls are subject to very wide margins of error, yet are treated as accurate measurements of public opinion.
0 all of the above 

Today, most polling is done through
1 random digit dialing.
0 entry polls.
0 door-to-door interviewing.
0 man-on-the-street interviewing.
0 exit polls. 

Concerns about reliance of pollsters on telephone surveys have recently been caused by
0 decreased chances of finding people at home.
0 increased use of random digit dialing.
0 increased non-listing of phone numbers.
1 increased use of cell phones.
0 a decrease in no-call lists. 


According to the text, public opinion polls are
0 unimportant since what people say and what people do are two different things.
0 becoming less important as more people recognize their inaccuracies.
0 important because results can sway people to change their political preferences.
0 largely meaningless because they tend to measure people's responses to an agenda set by the pollster and assumptions embedded in the questions by the pollster.
1 important because policymakers can keep in touch with changing opinions on the issues. 

Public opinion polls can weaken democracy by
1 drowning out election issues with a steady flood of poll results.
0 undermining the bandwagon effect and encouraging voters to support candidates without regard for the opinions of others.
0 predicting the wrong winner in a close election.
0 misleading politicians with delayed and outdated information about changing opinions of the public.
0 all of the above 

Critics of polling think
0 it gives politicians the wrong information.
1 it makes politicians more concerned with following than leading.
0 the public's opinion should not be taken into account.
0 it could lead to a tyranny of the majority.
0 B and D only 

A disadvantage of telephone public opinion surveys is
0 that they cost more than face-to-face surveys.
0 that they have a lower response rate than face-to-face interviews.
0 that some individuals do not own phones.
0 that they have a lower response rate than mail interviews.
1 both B and C 

An exit poll is taken
0 just prior to the election, in order to get a last reading of the public's views.
0 to measure an officeholder's popularity as he or she is leaving office.
0 as people leave supermarkets, shopping malls, sporting events, or movies, and are thus available for interviews.
1 on election day, by interviewing voters as they leave the polling place.
0 all of the above 

For ________, voting places are randomly selected around the country, and interviewers askevery tenth person how they voted.
0 absentee balloting
0 a referendum
0 preventing voting fraud
0 reapportionment
1 an exit poll 

Which of the following is NOT true about exit polls?
0 People are asked how they voted rather than how they plan to vote.
1 Most people are contacted by the random digit dialing method.
0 They are used by the media to project election winners before most votes have been counted except in close races.
0 They have been criticized in presidential elections for declaring a winner before voting is completed in the West.
0 They are being used more today than they were in the 1970s. 

Poll results can vary widely if
1 a question is altered, even slightly.
0 based on exit polls.
0 random sampling is used.
0 the sample is too large.
0 political socialization is not considered. 

In 2000, exit polls received much of the blame for the media's inaccurate call of the Floridaresult, but blame could also be placed on
0 mistakes in early reporting of vote results in some counties.
0 underestimates of the absentee vote.
0 the incompetence of news anchorpersons.
1 both A and B
0 both A and C 

Public opinion analysts agree that the level of public knowledge about politics is
0 pretty good.
1 dismally low.
0 constantly fluctuating.
0 fair.
0 surprisingly sharp and sophisticated. 

If public opinion analysts agree about anything it is that
1 the level of public knowledge about politics is dismally low.
0 people have something to say about almost every issue.
0 people's views on politics are coherent and consistent.
0 people do not have opinions on most current public policy issues.
0 people think about politics in very meaningful and abstract ways. 

Public opinion polls have shown that
0 most people can name their representatives, but do not know how they generally vote in Congress.
1 people are more likely to recognize slogans from TV commercials than famous political figures.
0 most people are well-informed about politics, but know little about geography.
0 only during an international crisis are people able to locate specific countries involved in the crisis.
0 political knowledge is higher now than it was forty years ago. 

According to Russell Neuman, the paradox of mass politics is that the American politicalsystem works as well as it does given
0 the fact that elected officials tend to ignore public opinion.
0 the inaccuracy of public opinion polls giving politicians false information about what people want.
0 the inability of people to express their opinion on issues and candidates.
0 that most people do not even know what basic values they want upheld.
1 the discomforting lack of public knowledge about politics. 

Since the 1960s, Americans ¹ trust in government has
0 increased.
1 decreased.
0 stayed the same.
0 been erratic.
0 disappeared. 

A ________ is a coherent set of values and beliefs about public policy.
0 policy agenda
1 political ideology
0 demography
0 public opinion
0 political socialization 

Following the 1964 election,
0 public interest in government dropped slightly for a brief period.
1 public trust in government dropped significantly.
0 public knowledge about political affairs improved significantly.
0 public interest in campaigns increased.
0 presidential approval increased significantly. 

In 1980, about what percentage of the American public thought they could trust governmentmost of the time or always?
0 75 percent
0 33 percent
0 50 percent
1 25 percent
0 60 percent 

According to Marc Hetherington, what is the largest impact of declining political trust?
0 decreased respect of American politicians in the foreign pres
1 decreased support for programs that address poverty and racial inequality
0 higher taxes
0 increased political ignorance
0 the inability of the president to address pressing foreign policy concerns 

A political ideology is
0 the process through which an individual acquires his or her political skills.
0 a relatively small proportion of people who are chosen as representative of the whole.
0 the distribution of the population's beliefs about politics and policy issues.
0 the set of courses that a political science student must complete to attain a degree.
1 a coherent set of values and beliefs about public policy. 

Which of the following is TRUE about most liberals in American politics?
0 They favor keeping taxes and government spending low.
1 They believe we should guard carefully the rights of defendants in criminal cases.
0 They are supportive of prayer in public schools.
0 They oppose abortion.
0 none of the above 

Which of the following is TRUE of most conservatives in American politics?
1 They favor free market solutions to problems rather than looking to the government for regulating business.
0 They believe we should spend much less on the military budget.
0 They are in favor of affirmative action programs.
0 They are opposed to prayer in public schools.
0 They oppose high levels of foreign aid. 

A political figure who is in favor of increased military spending, supported freedom of choiceon abortion, opposed affirmative action programs, wanted to tax the rich more, and felt thecourts should stop coddling criminals is a
0 socialist.
1 mixture of liberal and conservative.
0 liberal.
0 conservative.
0 populist. 

In general, liberal ideology supports
1 a strong central government that sets policies to promote equality.
0 individuals responding generously to each other to solve society's problems without looking to government to do so.
0 a small, less active government that gives freer reign to the private sector.
0 public and government ownership of the means of production.
0 strong local and state governments that are closer to the people. 

Liberals tend to
0 support lower taxation.
0 favor maintaining peace through strength.
0 support lower government spending.
0 support school prayer.
1 none of the above 

Conservatives would tend to favor each of the following EXCEPT
1 affirmative action.
0 low taxes.
0 increased military spending.
0 free-market solutions.
0 the right to life. 

Historically disadvantaged groups tend to
0 vote Republican.
1 vote Democratic.
0 vote for Green candidates.
0 vote Libertarian.
0 vote as Independents. 

Compared to men, women are more likely to
0 oppose higher levels of military spending.
0 support spending on social services.
0 be indifferent to issues of government spending.
0 support military intervention around the world.
1 both A and B 

The term gender gap refers to
0 greater success of men than women when running for office.
0 greater poverty of women than of men.
1 stable pattern where women tend to be more likely than men to vote Democratic.
0 higher political contributions made by women than of men.
0 none of the above 

The most liberal religious group in America are
0 Christian Right.
1 Jews.
0 Catholics.
0 Protestants.
0 Muslims. 

According to the classic study, The American Voter, done in the 1950s, most Americans fell intothe category of
1 group benefits voters.
0 ideologues.
0 no-issue-content voters.
0 anti-ideologues.
0 nature-of-the-times voters. 

The American Voter study on ideological sophistication among voters in the 1950s showed thatonly a small percentage of Americans
0 had no coherent political ideology.
0 identified with groups reflecting their own interests.
1 had a coherent political ideology.
0 had ever taken a government or civics course.
0 linked their own economic well-being with the party in power. 

The American Voter study on ideological sophistication among voters in the 1950s showed thata plurality of Americans were
1 group benefits voters.
0 ideologues.
0 nature-of-the-times voters.
0 authoritarian personalities.
0 no-issue-content voters. 

According to the categories used in the classic study, The American Voter, those who voted for aparty out of routine, or judged candidates strictly by their personalities were classified as
0 group benefits voters.
0 nature-of-the-times voters.
0 ideologues.
0 personalistic voters.
1 no-issue-content voters. 

If the exact same methods are used to update the analysis of The American Voter study, onefinds
0 there are more no-issue-content voters than group benefit voters in 1988.
0 a dramatic increase in the number of authoritarian personalities since 1956.
1 only some increase in the percentage of ideologues in 1988 compared to 1956.
0 half as many nature-of-the-times voters in 1988 than in 1956.
0 ideologues became a plurality in 1988. 

The authors of The American Voter would agree with each of the following statements EXCEPT
0 It is a misnomer to speak of election results as indicating a movement of the public either left or right.
0 For most people, the terms liberal and conservative are not as important as they are for the political elite.
1 People who think in ideological terms are most likely to switch parties from one election to the next.
0 Eisenhower's two election victories represented a shift in the conservative direction during the 1950s.
0 none of the above 

When people vote according to the nature of the times,
0 partisan identification becomes an even stronger influence on aggregate voting.
0 they are not voting wisely.
1 they are more interested in results than ideology and judge presidents by results.
0 they are not making rational choices.
0 their opinions are not clearly heard. 

Recent presidential elections have shown
0 a sharp turn in public thinking to more conservative positions on issues.
1 that voters are less interested in ideology or issue positions than in candidate traits such as competence and integrity.
0 a sharp turn in public thinking to more liberal positions on issues.
0 a dramatic growth of ideological voters.
0 that voters are more interested in issue positions than in candidate ideology. 

In the presidential election of 2004, ________ of Americans voted.
0 69 percent
1 55 percent
0 39 percent
0 59 percent
0 45 percent 

Which of the following statements about political participation is FALSE?
0 The mass protests throughout Eastern Europe in 1989 were an avalanche of political participation.
0 Political participation can be organized or individual.
1 Political activity is an important part of the everyday life of most Americans.
0 Generally, the United States has a participatory political culture.
0 Voting is one type of participation. 

The most common form of political participation in the United States is
1 voting in presidential elections.
0 voting in local elections.
0 belonging to a political party.
0 writing letters to public officials.
0 working on a political campaign. 

Sidney Verba and his colleagues found that while voter turnout declined between 1967 and1987,
0 writing letters to the editor and contacting government officials increased.
0 participating in non-political activities increased.
0 protesting and giving money to candidates increased.
1 contacting government officials and giving money to candidates increased.
0 none of the above 

Protest
0 involves consciously breaking a law thought to be unjust.
0 usually involves the use of violence, even murder, to achieve desired results.
0 is considered a conventional form of political participation.
1 is designed to achieve policy change through dramatic and unconventional tactics.
0 requires civil disobedience to be effective. 


Political protest is
1 the use of unconventional and dramatic actions to achieve policy change.
0 a recent phenomenon in American politics.
0 generally ineffective in bringing about changes in public policy.
0 against the law in the United States.
0 all of the above 

Civil disobedience necessarily involves
0 non-violent protests to achieve desired results.
1 consciously breaking a law thought to be unjust.
0 working within the laws to achieve objectives.
0 rioting and violence to achieve desired results.
0 A and D only 

The most famous practitioner of civil disobedience in the United States during the twentiethcentury was this Nobel Peace Prize winner,
0 Robert F. Kennedy.
0 Mother Jones.
0 John F. Kennedy.
0 Jesse Jackson.
1 Martin Luther King, Jr. 


________ is consciously breaking a law that is thought to be unjust.
1 Civil disobedience
0 Protest
0 Rebellion
0 Boycotting
0 Illegal politics 

Civil disobedience
0 usually involves the use of violence.
0 was first used by Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., to call attention to the injustice of segregation laws.
1 is intentionally violating a law believed to be unjust in order to bring about change.
0 occurs whenever a person violates a law and seeks to avoid the consequences.
0 all of the above 

Which of the following is TRUE in regard to the voting habits of African Americans andHispanic Americans?
0 They have always voted about as much as whites despite legal barriers.
0 The gap between their voter turnout and that of whites has widened considerably over the past thirty years.
0 Members of these groups are less likely to vote the higher their income.
1 Members of these groups are more likely to vote than whites of the same income level.
0 none of the above 

Which of the following groups would be LEAST likely to vote in a typical election?
0 middle-class minority voters
1 poor white voters
0 rich white voters
0 poor minority voters
0 rich minority voters 

One of the reasons why the participation gap between minority groups and the nationalaverage is no longer enormous is because
0 minorities are now the majority, and their average is the national average.
0 the education and income levels of minorities are no longer significantly lower than that of whites.
0 large numbers of minorities are now running for important political offices.
0 education and income are no longer considered good predictors of voting behavior.
1 minorities have a group consciousness that gives them an extra incentive to vote. 

There is evidence that when incomes and educational levels are equal
0 members of the majority tend to be more politically active than minorities.
1 members of minority groups tend to participate more than members of the majority.
0 Hispanics participate more than whites and African Americans participate less than whites.
0 Hispanics, African Americans, and women tend to be less politically active than white males.
0 the political participation of members of minority groups and the majority are also equal. 


Recent public opinion polls have shown that most Americans
0 favor the idea of big government in principle, but oppose it in practice.
1 oppose the idea of big government in principle, but favor it in practice.
0 oppose big government.
0 have strong opinions on the proper scope of government.
0 favor big government. 


High-tech politics refers to
1 a politics in which the behavior of citizens and policymakers is shaped by technology.
0 a proposal for direct democracy through the use of telephone voting.
0 a futuristic society in which politics is controlled by computers, freeing people for more honorable pursuits.
0 the use of cable television to broadcast the workings of the government.
0 the ability of government to observe the behavior of citizens through electronic means. 

A media event is
0 a news event deemed of such importance to break into regular programming on television and radio.
0 a gathering of people working in the media industry, often an awards ceremony.
0 some newsworthy occurrence covered by reporters of the various media.
1 staged primarily for the purpose of being covered by the press.
0 a setup by the media to ambush or embarrass a prominent person. 

A ________ is staged by a campaign primarily for the purpose of being covered on televisionand in the press.
1 media event
0 TV commercial
0 political incident
0   Get Out the Vote   effort
0 political play 

Media events are
0 spontaneous occurrences such as train wrecks or assassinations that we normally think of as news.
0 monopolized by political elites.
1 purposely staged events held in front of the media.
0 spontaneous events used to enhance image.
0 ineffective when used by political radicals. 

Purposely staged activities held in front of the media are called
0 trial balloons.
1 media events.
0 political dramas.
0 press conferences.
0 news. 

Approximately ________ of presidential campaign spending is for TV ads.
0 40 percent
0 20 percent
1 60 percent
0 80 percent
0 90 percent 

According to the text, Ronald Reagan's presidency was characterized by
1 more concern and energy devoted to the president's media appearances than in any other administration.
0 a number of spontaneous media appearances by the president designed to take advantage of his Hollywood experience.
0 considerable animosity between the media and the administration.
0 Reagan's frequent false statements which were later documented by reporters to be either errors or deliberate lies.
0 attempts to avoid media appearances by the president. 

News management in the Reagan White House operated on each of the following principlesEXCEPT
0 talk about the issues you want to talk about.
0 control the flow of information.
1 expand reporters ¹ access to the president.
0 revving helicopter engines so the president would not be able to hear reporters ¹ questions and not have to answer them.
0 stay on the offense. 

Up until the presidency of Franklin Roosevelt,
0 reporters did not ask presidents questions, they simply reported what presidents did.
0 presidents held daily press conferences.
0 presidents held private chats with reporters in a very informal setting rather than hold public press conferences.
1 reporters submitted their questions to presidents in writing.
0 reporters had fireside chats with presidents in the White House. 

The first president to manipulate media politics with many press conferences and firesidechats successfully was
0 Ronald Reagan.
1 Franklin Roosevelt.
0 Lyndon Johnson.
0 Abraham Lincoln.
0 John F. Kennedy. 

In what was a very different era, the press chose not to point out to readers or to photographthe fact that President ________ was confined to a wheelchair.
0 Warren Harding
0 Harry Truman
0 Dwight Eisenhower
0 Lyndon Johnson
1 Franklin Roosevelt 

Why did President Roosevelt become silent during the last minute of a radio address during areelection campaign?
0 Political pranksters from the Republican party disabled the power supply to the radio station.
1 He wanted to reduce the size of his opponent's audience.
0 The radio station director disliked the positions Roosevelt was taking and cut him off.
0 He talked for so long that he lost his voice.
0 The radio station cut him off because he had exceeded his time limit. 

Which president held one thousand press conferences, far more than any other?
0 John F. Kennedy
0 Richard Nixon
0 Ronald Reagan
1 Franklin Roosevelt
0 Bill Clinton 


Prior to the 1930s,
0 press conferences were held twice a week.
1 the president was rarely directly questioned by the media.
0 the media was dominated by a few influential newspapers.
0 image-building was essentially built around radio broadcasting.
0 the president catered to the local, rather than the national, press. 

The first president to successfully utilize media politics was
0 Ronald Reagan.
0 Richard Nixon.
0 George Washington.
0 Abraham Lincoln.
1 Franklin Roosevelt. 

Which of the following statements about Franklin Roosevelt and the news media is FALSE?
0 Roosevelt used presidential wrath to warn reporters off material he did not want covered.
0 The press revered Roosevelt.
0 Roosevelt knew how to feed the right story to the right reporter.
1 The press often reported on Roosevelt's health and confinement to a wheelchair.
0 none of the above 

The cozy relationship between politicians and the press in the twentieth century lasted until
0 the Iranian Hostage Crisis.
0 World War II.
0 the commercialization of television.
0 the beginning of Franklin Roosevelt's presidency.
1 the Vietnam War and Watergate. 

The use of detective-like reporting methods to unearth scandals is known as
0 yellow journalism.
0 trial balloons.
0 scientific journalism.
1 investigative journalism.
0 print journalism. 

The cozy relationship between politicians and the press ended when
1 the Vietnam War and Watergate soured the press on government.
0 the press discovered John F. Kennedy in a compromising situation with a woman other than his wife.
0 Franklin Roosevelt chastised the news reports he deemed inaccurate.
0 Ronald Reagan began to manipulate the press to his advantage.
0 Abraham Lincoln nationalized major Union newspapers during the Civil War. 

Today's news people work in an environment of ________ toward government.
0 friendship
1 cynicism
0 hostility
0 trust
0 acceptance 

At the turn of the century, newspaper magnates Joseph and William Randolph Hearst usheredin the era of
1 yellow journalism.
0 nickel tabloids.
0 newspaper chains.
0 penny press.
0 political advertising. 

The first daily newspaper in America was
0 the Associated Press established in 1841.
0 The New York Times established in 1800.
1 printed in Philadelphia in 1783.
0 the Colonial Gazette printed in 1607.
0 Common Sense printed in 1776. 



The Associated Press is an example of a
0 high-technology medium.
0 newspaper chain.
0 massive media conglomerate.
1 wire service.
0 trade association acting as an interest group for newspapers. 

With over 2,700 reporters, photographers and editors, ________ has more news gatheringability than any other news organization.
0 Gannett
1 the Associated Press
0 The New York Times
0 Columbia Broadcasting System
0 King Features Syndicate 

The nation's most influential newspaper and its unofficial   newspaper of record   is
0 Congressional Quarterly.
0 USA Today.
1 The New York Times.
0 the Wall Street Journal.
0 the Washington Post. 

For most newspapers in medium-sized cities and small towns, their principal source forreporting national and world news is
0 USA Today.
0 The New York Times.
0 Cable News Network.
1 The Associated Press.
0 The Washington Post. 


The principal source of news and information for most Americans today is
0 newspapers.
0 radio talk shows.
0 magazines.
0 print media.
1 the broadcast media. 

In a famous, televised speech in 1952 to save his vice -presidential candidacy, ________ deniedhaving received illegal gifts and payments, and declared that the family dog, Checkers, thougha gift, would not be returned.
0 John Sparkman
1 Richard Nixon
0 Lyndon Johnson
0 Spiro Agnew
0 Dwight Eisenhower 


Four out of five newspaper readers in America read papers owned by
1 large corporate chains located out of town.
0 fearless local editors.
0 the Associated Press.
0 television stations.
0 their employees. 

Serious magazines of political news and opinion are
1 basically reserved for the educated elite in America.
0 almost nonexistent in the United States.
0 a principle source of news and information for most Americans.
0 rapidly dying out in the United States, but remain very healthy in Europe and Latin America.
0 a more common source for national and international news than newspapers. 

The principle source of news and information in the United States is
0 the print media.
0 magazines and radio.
0 newspapers.
0 radio talk shows.
1 the broadcast media. 

In general, magazines are
0 politically conservative.
0 basically reserved for the educated elite.
1 not a major source of news in the United States.
0 not read very widely in the United States.
0 a major source of news in the United States. 

Newspaper magnates Joseph Pulitzer and William Randolph Hearst tried to outdo oneanother in sensational reporting of wars, violence, corruption, and gossip around the turn ofthe twentieth century in what is now remembered as the era of
1 yellow journalism.
0 investigative journalism.
0 tabloid journalism.
0 scandalism.
0 hyperjournalism. 

Television became extremely important in political campaigns beginning in
0 1948.
0 1952.
0 1972.
1 1960.
0 1984. 

Richard Nixon believed he lost the 1960 presidential election because
0 news coverage of his campaign was consistently biased against him.
0 the Cuban Missile Crisis stole media attention from his campaign.
0 of voter fraud in New York City.
0 of Kennedy's dramatic pledge not to raise taxes.
1 he was sweating and had an ugly beard stubble during a debate with Kennedy. 

The first televised ________ occurred during the 1960 presidential campaign.
0 election returns
1 presidential debate
0 national political convention
0 political commercial
0 presidential press conference 

The 1960 presidential debate between Richard Nixon and John F. Kennedy illustrates the
0 propagandistic nature of American presidential campaigns.
0 role of radio broadcasting in the United States.
0 importance of experience in presidential politics.
0 importance of issues in presidential debates.
1 power of television in American politics. 

Television became especially important in bringing the reality of ________ home to America asits first heavily televised war.
1 the Vietnam War
0 the Korean War
0 World War I
0 the war in Iraq
0 World War II 


Individuals aged 29 and under are
0 more likely than older individuals to spend time getting news.
0 less likely than older individuals to use the Internet for news.
0 more likely to rely on newspapers than on television as a news source.
1 less likely than older individuals to learn about the presidential campaign from a daily newspaper.
0 more likely than older individuals to use newsmagazines as a news source. 

Narrowcasting refers to
0 media programming focused entirely on media events.
0 the technical ability to block access to broadcast signals.
1 media programming aimed at a particular (narrow) audience.
0 media programming delivered in brief program segments.
0 political advertising being developed for homogeneous audiences. 

During the military campaign in Afghanistan, President Bush and the White House frequentlywatched ________ to see events as they happened.
0 Nightline
0 Good Morning America
0 closed circuit, top-secret Pentagon video relays
1 CNN
0 The MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour 

Cable News Network (CNN)
0 has taken the place of the three major networks as Americans ¹ primary source for news.
0 specializes in after-the-fact news summaries and in-depth analysis.
1 has brought television into a new era of bringing the news to people and political leaders as it happens.
0 is a government-owned news agency that specializes in international news.
0 has had more effect on the mass public than it has had on political elites. 


Who is the most likely to visit a candidate's web site?
1 the candidate's supporters
0 the candidate's detracters
0 undecided voters
0 unregistered citizens
0 retired Americans 

To a large extent, television networks define news as what is ________ to viewers.
0 informative
0 vital information
1 entertaining
0 thought-provoking
0 yet unknown 

Most news organizations assign their best reporters to particular ________, which are specificlocations where news frequently emanates.
1 beats
0 digs
0   theaters  
0   lighthouses  
0 chains 

Today's massive media conglomerates control newspapers with over ________ of the nation'sdaily circulation.
0 53 percent
0 30 percent
0 50 percent
1 80 percent
0 33 percent 

The bottom line that shapes how journalists define the news, where they get the news, andhow they present it is
0 their personal ideology.
0 the First Amendment right to freedom of the press.
0 government regulations.
1 profits.
0 their professional values. 

News is what
0 the public believes are the most important political issues facing the country.
0 government officials want it to be.
1 is timely and different.
0 has the greatest impact on the most people.
0 journalism professors say it is. 

Television news programs are tailored to
0 a highly educated audience.
1 a fairly low level of audience sophistication.
0 male audiences in their twenties and thirties with high disposable incomes.
0 white middle-class America.
0 an urban population. 

Reporters and their official sources usually have a(n) ________ relationship.
0 hostile
0 disinterested
0 adversarial
0 conspiratorial
1 symbiotic 


Public officials often leak ________ to reporters to see what the political reaction will be.
1 trial balloons
0 sound bites
0 beats
0   oiled news  
0 talking heads 



Most news coverage is perhaps best described as
1 superficial.
0 thorough.
0 complex.
0 superlative.
0 metacognitive. 


A new approach to reporting introduced during the 2003 Iraq war was to
0 use more satellite coverage.
1 embed reporters with troops.
0 distribute detailed military plans to journalists in advance.
0 allow reporters to move around on their own.
0 all of the above 

Most television news analysis reports
0 run over ten minutes.
0 run about five minutes.
0 run about seven minutes.
1 last less than a minute.
0 run about two minutes. 

News coverage by the print and broadcast media is generally
0 very ideologically biased.
0 comprehensive.
0 detailed.
0 controversial.
1 superficial. 

Television news coverage characteristically
0 has little impact on shaping political opinions.
1 lacks in-depth analysis.
0 emphasizes policy issues.
0 focuses on Congressional politics more than presidential politics.
0 focuses on what elites think is important. 

As technology has enabled the media to pass along information with greater speed, newscoverage has become
0 less biased.
1 less complete.
0 randomized.
0 more biased.
0 more complete. 

Sound bites are
1 short clips of a political speech lasting fifteen seconds or less.
0 leaks by official sources used to test the political waters.
0 negative news coverage received by a public figure. They hurt!
0 a form of censorship widely used in Great Britain.
0 negative political advertisements that offer quick attacks on one's opponent. 

A catchy line is what is most important for a
0 beat.
1 sound bite.
0 leak.
0 trial balloon.
0 presidential press conference. 

During the 1992 election campaign, CBS News promised to ________, but then changed itspolicy when it proved to be unworkable.
0 follow campaign ads with factual analysis
1 reform the sound bite process
0 ban coverage of polls
0 float no trial balloons
0 give equal time to each candidate on each news broadcast 

Rather than cover entire speeches by political figures, television news typically provides________ of fifteen seconds or less.
0 trial balloons
0 beats
1 sound bites
0 leaks
0 news snacks 

In 2004, the average sound bite of a presidential candidate shown talking on the nightly newsaveraged
1 less than ten seconds.
0 about thirty seconds.
0 about two minutes.
0 about ninety seconds.
0 about a minute. 

The average amount of air time that a presidential candidate has been given to talkuninterrupted on the TV news
0 has increased dramatically since 1960.
0 has increased dramatically since 1980.
1 has declined dramatically since the 1960s.
0 has been remarkably consistent over the years.
0 has increased slightly since 1970. 

Which of the following statements about television news is FALSE?
0 The only highly regarded in-depth news shows on television are watched by very few viewers.
0 Studies have shown that television gives only skimpy attention to the issues during a presidential campaign.
0 The complex issues of today are difficult to treat in a short news clip.
1 Television analysis of news events has been rapidly increasing.
0 Television news is less detailed than that presented in newspapers. 

A 2002 survey of 1,149 journalists found that, compared to the general public, journalists weretwice as likely to consider themselves
1 Democrats.
0 radicals.
0 Republicans.
0 conservatives.
0 policy entrepreneurs. 


One survey of journalists in 2002 found that ________ were Republican.
1 19 percent
0 60 percent
0 54 percent
0 30 percent
0 44 percent 

One survey of journalists in 2002 found that ________ were Democrats.
1 37 percent
0 29 percent
0 60 percent
0 45 percent
0 85 percent 

A study by the Los Angeles Times in the mid-1980s found that reporters were ________ as likelyto call themselves liberal as the general public.
1 twice
0 half
0 one-third
0 just
0 not 

The overriding bias in the news is toward stories that
0 include talking heads.
0 are triangular.
0 are liberal.
1 draw large audiences.
0 target-specific audiences. 


A shot of a person's face speaking directly into the television camera is known as a
0 superfacial.
1 talking head.
0 head shot.
0 sound bite.
0 mug shot. 

Which of the following is LEAST likely to fascinate television news viewers?
0 violence
0 scandal
0 disaster
1 a talking head
0 a breaking crime story 

The news does not mirror reality because
0 journalists are more liberal than most people.
0 the number of potential news stories is limited.
1 journalists must select stories that will draw the largest audience.
0 journalists are more conservative than most people.
0 the news media are biased toward the coverage of political events. 

When journalists select stories to cover, the overriding bias is toward
0 stories about the personality quirks of political celebrities.
0 international and foreign policy stories.
1 stories that will draw the largest audience.
0 stories involving the most important policy issues of the day.
0 stories that target specific audiences. 

A talking head is a reference to
0 a television talk show host.
1 a shot of a person's face talking directly to the camera.
0 a news leak that is discretely passed to a reporter in a public washroom.
0 a television news anchor.
0 a television talk show. 

The earliest survey studies of the effect of the media on public opinion, which evaluated itsimpact on voting behavior, offered
0 much evidence that media action influenced political campaign outcomes.
0 a policy agenda interpretation.
0 the observation that Democratic control of Congress was partly due to media bias in news coverage.
1 the minimal effects hypothesis.
0 the hypodermic needle model. 

Critics of the   minimal effects hypothesis   about the media's effect on public opinion point tothe media's role in
0 how voters cast their ballots.
0 concealing problems that exist by ignoring them.
1 shaping what priority Americans attach to problems.
0 whether people choose to vote.
0 mobilizing voter turnout. 


The media seem to have the least effect in terms of
1 how people vote.
0 how people evaluate political leaders.
0 what Americans think about.
0 the importance people attach to problems.
0 who votes. 

The ________ is the list of subjects or problems to which government officials, and peopleoutside of government closely associated with those officials, are paying some seriousattention to at any given time.
0 A-List
0 plum book
0 prioritization schedule
0 catalog of current issues
1 policy agenda 

Agenda-setting effects on public opinion are an example of how
0 the media influence individual's vote choices.
0 the media have a bias in favor of the status quo.
1 the media cue individuals about what political issues are important to think about.
0 the media have a liberal bias.
0 the media have no bias. 

Agenda setting effects are especially strong for the
0 younger generation who distrust the media.
1 politically knowledgeable who trust the media.
0 politically ignorant who trust the media.
0 television audience who trusts the media.
0 older, more politically experienced individuals. 

The impact of TV news is that it
0 familiarizes the public with issues through its emphasis on headline reading.
1 alters the priorities Americans attach to a circumscribed set of problems.
0 influences the governmental agenda because policymakers and policy entrepreneurs depend on it.
0 has little influence on the public agenda because most viewers are less educated.
0 all of the above 

The policy agenda is
0 a set of issues or problems that the public considers important.
0 a schedule of bills before Congress.
1 a list of priorities to which government officials address their time and energies.
0 a linkage institution between people and government.
0 all of the above 

People who invest their political   capital   in a particular issue are often called
0 talking heads.
0 policy wonks.
1 policy entrepreneurs.
0 political investors.
0 policy specialists. 

Which of the following are NOT normally policy entrepreneurs?
1 mass media
0 appointed government officials
0 interest groups
0 elected government officials
0 political parties 

Which of the following statements about policy agendas is FALSE?
0 Interest groups, political parties, and the president are all examples of those who push for their priorities to take precedence.
0 Scores of issues compete for attention from the government.
0 The policy agenda receives some serious attention at any given time.
1 Only government officials develop policy priorities.
0 none of the above 

A policy entrepreneur is
0 an elected or appointed public official.
0 a candidate seeking a career in elective office.
1 someone who works to get ideas on the government's policy agenda.
0 a knowledge specialist in a policy area.
0 someone who uses politics for self-gain. 

The media usually report on America's social problems in a manner that
1 encourages government to take on more and more tasks.
0 suggests government can really not be trusted to take on more tasks.
0 is neither critical nor positive.
0 displays a lack of real sensitivity.
0 has often been described as benign neglect. 

Which of the following is NOT true about the media in America?
0 The media argue that if their news is superficial, it is because that is what people want.
0 The media do a better job covering the   horse race   aspect of politics than of covering substantive issues.
0 Reporters often see themselves in a reformism role, crusading against foul play and unfairness.
1 Their skepticism about governmental honesty and efficiency leads them to oppose giving government greater responsibilities.
0 none of the above 

More than any other development in the twentieth century, the rise of television broadcastinghas reinforced ________ in the American political process.
0 interest
1 individualism
0 behavioralism
0 participation
0 democratization 

The watchdog orientation of the press helps to
0 increase confidence in government.
1 restrict politicians.
0 de-emphasize individualism.
0 educate the mass public.
0 assist politicians in leading the mass public. 

The watchdog orientation of the press can be characterized as
1 reformist.
0 liberal.
0 libertarian.
0 conservative.
0 partisan. 

The media inevitably encourage the growth of government when they
0 focus on policy issues.
0 reapply for their broadcast licenses.
0 uncover government waste.
0 act as a watchdog.
1 focus on injustice in society. 


A political party is
0 less interested in winning elections than in particular public policy.
0 a group of people who agree on everything and organize annually to win elections.
0 a narrow interest group seeking advantage through elections.
1 a team of men and women with similar beliefs seeking legitimate control of the government by through elections.
0 an organization devoted to implementing policy in the public interest. 

The largest segment of an American political party is described as
0 the party-out-of-power.
1 the party-in-the-electorate.
0 the party-in-government.
0 the party volunteers.
0 the party organization. 

In the description of political parties as   three-headed political giants,   which of the followingis NOT considered one of those three heads?
0 the party-in-government
1 the party-out-of-power
0 the party-in-the-electorate
0 the party as an organization
0 none of the above 

Which of the following is TRUE of political parties in the United States?
1 To be a member of a party, all you have to do is claim to be one.
0 Parties require dues.
0 They are more powerful than their European counterparts.
0 Parties issue membership cards to all members.
0 Party members agree on all major issues or they will be expelled from the party. 

The key spokespersons for political parties come from which of its major components?
0 the party-in-the-electorate
0 the party as an organization
0 the party-out-of-power
0 the leaders-of-the-party-organization
1 the party-in-government 

A political party is best defined as
0 a group of men and women organized for the sole purpose of influencing public policy.
0 an organized team of men and women with a political agenda.
0 any group of men and women with a formal membership and a political or social purpose stated in their by-laws.
1 a team of men and women seeking control of the governing apparatus by gaining office in a duly constituted election.
0 a coalition of interests trying to influence government policies for their benefit. 

According to the   three-headed political giant   model of political parties, the largestcomponent of an American party is the
0 party as an organization.
0 party-in-the-states.
0 party Congress.
1 party-in-the-electorate.
0 party-in-government. 

In the United States, to become a member of a political party you need to
0 pay annual dues.
0 officially join that party by attending a party meeting.
0 hold a membership card.
0 register with that party at your precinct office.
1 claim to be a member. 

The people who keep the party running between elections and make its rules are members ofwhich   head   of the party?
0 party-in-the-electorate
0 permanent party
1 party as an organization
0 party-in-government
0 party-in-the-states 

The   party-in-government   refers to
0 registered party voters who hold civil service jobs in the government and are influencing policy.
1 winning candidates who become the main spokespersons for the party that nominated them.
0 coalitions of interests and ideologies that support a party's candidates.
0 party workers who hold patronage jobs in the government and can influence policy.
0 party members who perpetuate the party, make its rules, and keep it running. 


Almost all definitions of political parties have which of the following in common?
0 Parties have formal organizations.
0 Parties have a mass following.
1 Parties try to win elections.
0 Parties are run by elites.
0 Parties have limited policy agendas. 

Which is a linkage institution?
0 Supreme Court
0 Executive Office of the President
0 Congress
0 all of the above
1 none of the above 

A party's endorsement to officially run for office as the candidate of that party is called
0 a ballot.
0 a ticket.
1 a nomination.
0 a confirmation.
0 an appointment. 

Political parties perform all of the following tasks EXCEPT
0 pick policymakers and run campaigns.
1 enforce rigid adherence to their policy positions.
0 advocate public policies.
0 coordinate policymaking.
0 give cues to voters. 

As ________, political parties serve the role of translating inputs from the public into outputsfrom policymakers.
0 coalitions
0 superdelegates
0 political converters
0 machines
1 linkage institutions 


American political parties tend to take middle-of-the-road stands on major issues
0 only because the party's candidates are so afraid of alienating those on different sides of issues.
0 while the public tends to have stronger opinions
0 in spite of evidence that more extreme positions generate more excitement and likelihood for electoral victory.
1 because most of the American electorate are centrist.
0 because most of the American electorate do not have political opinions. 

Rational-choice theory asserts that
0 the parties should not be expected to differentiate themselves in any way.
0 more extremist party positions give the public a sense that things can really be changed, and usually win elections.
0 the wise party selects policies in which it truly believes, and gives the voters a chance to vote them up or down on principle.
1 the wise party selects policies that are widely favored.
0 none of the above 

The theory that seeks to explain political processes and outcomes as consequences ofpurposive behavior is called the
1 rational-choice theory.
0 behaviorism.
0 means-ends theory.
0 cognitive theory.
0 goals theory. 

Compared to 1952, recent polls on party identification have shown that
0 more people today identify themselves as Democrats.
1 there are more independents than there are Democrats or Republicans.
0 the percentage of Democrats has increased only slightly, while the percentage of Republicans has declined.
0 both the percentages of both Democrats and Republicans in the country have increased.
0 none of the above 

Ticket-splitting is best understood as
1 voting with one party for one office and another for other offices.
0 voting for Democratic candidates for president and Republican candidates for Congress.
0 a tactic used to commit voter fraud, which enables a voter to cast multiple ballots.
0 staying with the same party in an election, voting down the party's line for every race.
0 voting for Republican candidates for president and Democratic candidates for Congress. 

The upsurge of partisan independence among Americans since 1952
0 has come mostly at the expense of the Republicans.
0 has not harmed either party.
1 has come mostly at the expense of the Democrats.
0 has occurred mostly among minor party identifiers.
0 has harmed both parties equally. 

In 2004, Americans were most likely to consider themselves ________, and least likely toconsider themselves ________.
0 Independents; Democrats
0 Republicans; Democrats
1 Independents; Republicans
0 Democrats; Independents
0 Democrats; Republicans 

Most Americans are
0 liberal.
0 moderate-liberals.
1 moderate.
0 conservative.
0 non-ideological. 

In recent elections, the trends in party identification in the United States have been
0 an increase in the percentage of Democrats and a decline in the percentage of Independents.
0 an increase in the percentages of Democrats and Republicans and a decline in the percentage of Independents.
0 an increase in the percentage of Democrats and a decline in the percentage of Republicans.
1 a decrease in the percentage of Democrats and an increase in the percentage of Independents.
0 a fairly constant percentage of Democrats, Republicans, and Independents. 

Ticket-splitting refers to
0 switching membership in political parties.
0 the procedure used to conduct computerized, automated vote counting.
0 voting with one party in one presidential election, and another party in the next presidential election.
1 voting for one party for one office, and another party for other offices.
0 voting for a party other than the one you identify with. 

In terms of organizational structure, American political parties are
0 organized more by regions of the country than at the state or national level.
1 decentralized and fragmented.
0 tightly controlled organisms that exert tremendous control over candidates.
0 operated on the principle of democratic centralism: Local and state organizations control the national organizations.
0 centralized and hierarchical. 

Power in the major United States political parties is
1 fragmented among local, state, and national party organizations.
0 concentrated in the state parties, with national and local organizations playing only minor roles.
0 hierarchically distributed from the national to local levels.
0 centralized in national party organizations.
0 concentrated in party machines at the local level. 

From the late-nineteenth century through the New Deal years, many of America's largestcities were dominated by
1 corrupt but popular party machines.
0 the Socialist party.
0 the Communist party.
0 mayors who refused to allow elections.
0 super delegates who controlled everything. 

Party machines in large cities relied primarily on ________ to reward friends and punishenemies.
0 local judges
1 patronage
0 city police departments
0 the civil service merit system
0 third parties 

A party machine is a kind of local party organization that
0 threatens the efficiency of state and national party organizations.
0 specializes in computerized mass mailings both to raise funds and influence voters on behalf of their candidates.
1 uses specific and material inducements to win party loyalty and power.
0 remains strong in most large American cities.
0 has recently come to depend heavily on ethnic group support. 


________ has some of the strongest parties in America.
0 Hawaii
1 Pennsylvania
0 New York
0 Texas
0 California 

Since 1960, state party organizations
0 have begun selecting candidates for state offices.
0 have been established for the first time as the national organizations have weakened.
0 have virtually disappeared as the national units have taken on their functions.
0 have begun selecting candidates for Congress.
1 have become much more powerful and organized. 

About which state has it been said that the political parties are so weak as to be almostnonexistent?
0 Pennsylvania
0 New York
0 Texas
0 Alaska
1 California 

In closed primaries,
0 voters may vote for candidates from either party.
0 voters may choose on election day which party primary they want to participate in.
1 only voters who have registered in advance with the party can vote.
0 voters may vote for multiple candidates.
0 none of the above 

In open primaries,
1 voters may choose on election day which party primary they want to participate in.
0 voters may vote for candidates from either party.
0 only voters who have registered in advance with the party can vote.
0 voters may vote for multiple candidates.
0 none of the above 

In blanket primaries,
0 voters may choose on election day which party primary they want to participate in.
0 only voters who have registered in advance with the party can vote.
1 voters may vote for candidates from either party.
0 voters may vote for multiple candidates.
0 none of the above 

Closed primaries
0 depress voter turnout.
1 encourage party loyalty.
0 discourage party loyalty.
0 cost less than open primaries.
0 have fewer undercounts. 

Blanket primaries
0 cost less than open primaries.
0 discourage party loyalty.
0 depress voter turnout.
1 encourage party loyalty.
0 have fewer undercounts. 

American national parties are best described as
0 controlled from the bottom (local level) up.
1 loose aggregations of state parties.
0 bicameral in nature.
0 centralized organizations based in Congress.
0 powerful, centralized organizations based in Washington, D.C. 

Each party holds a national convention every
0 six years.
0 year.
1 four years.
0 five years.
0 two years. 

The supreme power within each of the parties is
0 the state party organizations.
0 the president.
0 the Supreme Party Court.
1 the national convention.
0 the national committee. 

Keeping the party operating between conventions is the job of the
1 national committee.
0 regional offices.
0 elected officials.
0 congressional leadership.
0 majority or minority whip. 

The chairperson of the party that controls the White House is normally selected by
0 members of the party in Congress.
0 a committee of state chairpersons.
1 the president.
0 closed primary.
0 none of the above 

Every political party depends upon what the text calls a ________ , meaning a set ofindividuals or groups supporting it.
0 system of patronage
1 coalition
0 set of super delegates
0 power base
0 linkage institution 

The party national committees
0 select the party's presidential candidate.
0 are composed of each party's members of Congress.
0 meet once every four years.
0 write and approve the party's platform.
1 keep the party operating between conventions. 

The day-to-day activities of the national party are the responsibility of the
0 congressional party leaders.
1 national chairperson.
0 president.
0 national committee.
0 national convention. 

Voters and coalitions of voters are attracted to different parties largely by
0 selective perception.
1 their performance and policies.
0 the charisma of their candidates.
0 tradition.
0 their socio-economic status. 

Political candidates make many promises when running for office. In electing one, the publiccan expect
0 specific implementation of the promise to differ from the general promise made during the campaign.
0 few to be carried out because political promises are made to be broken.
1 that for every broken promise, many more will be kept.
0 a significant gap between party platform and political performance.
0 both A and D. 

The American political parties fall far short of the responsible party model for all of thefollowing reasons EXCEPT
0 they are too decentralized.
0 there is no mechanism for the parties to discipline officeholders.
1 their presidential candidates ignore the party platform.
0 their candidates are usually self-selected.
0 none of the above 

A study of major party platforms by Gerald Pomper found that the parties broke theirpromises
1 ten percent of the time.
0 half the time.
0 two-thirds of the time.
0 over ninety percent of the time.
0 a third of the time. 


A party era begins, or is made more certain, with
0 the defeat of an incumbent president.
1 a critical election.
0 the founding of a new major party.
0 party competition.
0 a congressional election. 

A critical election involves and accelerates a process called
0 partisan transformation.
0 electoral examination.
0 proportional representation.
1 party realignment.
0 democratic rejuvenation. 


Realignments are typically associated with
0 a major reorganization of the executive branch.
0 the creation of new states.
0 one party winning the presidency while the other controls Congress.
1 a major crisis or trauma in the nation.
0 changes in election laws. 

The first party system in the United States consisted of the
0 Democrats and Whigs.
0 Federalists and Whigs.
0 Democrats and Republicans.
1 Federalists and Democratic-Republicans.
0 Democratic-Republicans and Whigs. 

The dominant political party in America's first party system was the
1 Democratic-Republicans.
0 Whigs.
0 Republicans.
0 Democrats.
0 Federalists. 

The Democratic-Republicans were also known as the
1 Jeffersonians.
0 Madisonians.
0 Whigs.
0 Federalists.
0 Hamiltonians. 

The last Federalist president was
0 Alexander Hamilton.
1 John Adams.
0 Andrew Jackson.
0 Abraham Lincoln.
0 Thomas Jefferson. 

At the beginning of party development in the United States,
0 parties tried to defeat each other in elections.
0 there were many small parties, each representing a narrow interest.
0 we had a one-party system where one powerful party dominated the government and blocked the creation of new parties.
1 parties sought to destroy each other.
0 parties were merely the personal following of certain charismatic individuals. 

The first American political party evolved
0 from the supporters of George Washington's first campaign for president.
0 out of Thomas Jefferson's efforts to get the Declaration of Independence adopted.
0 out of public disgust over the duel between Aaron Burr and Alexander Hamilton, leading to calls to solve conflicts through peaceful party competition.
0 during the Constitutional Convention.
1 out of Alexander Hamilton's efforts to get Congress to establish a national bank. 



  Critical elections   always result in the
0 widespread public questioning of the American election process accompanied by calls for its reform.
0 displacement of the minority party by the majority party.
0 formation of new political parties.
0 successful bid by a third political party.
1 formation of new coalitions for each political party. 

Which of the following statements about party realignment is FALSE?
0 Party realignments are typically associated with a major crisis or trauma.
1 Party realignments were associated with the Civil War and with the Great Depression.
0 Party realignments transform the party system.
0 Party realignment involves a reconfiguration of the demographic groups supporting the parties.
0 Party realignments occur often in American political life. 

America's first and shortest-lived major political party was the
0 Anti-Federalist party.
0 Whig party.
0 Democratic-Republican party.
1 Federalist party.
0 Independence party. 

The first party system (1796-1824) was characterized by
0 professional politicians running for office.
0 the dominance of the presidency by the Federalist party.
0 the dominance of the Republican party.
0 the dominance of the northern capitalist states.
1 the dominance of the Democratic-Republican party. 

Andrew Jackson was the first president identified as a(n)
0 Independent.
1 Democrat.
0 Republican.
0 Democratic-Republican.
0 Whig. 

In the second party system in United States history, the election contests were between whichtwo major parties?
1 Democrats and Whigs
0 Democrats and Republicans
0 Federalists and Whigs
0 Republicans and Whigs
0 Federalists and Anti-Federalists 


The election of 1828 that brought Andrew Jackson to the presidency was significant because it
0 began the ascendancy of the New Deal coalition around the Democratic party.
0 marked the rise of the Whigs.
0 was the first time the Republican party controlled Congress.
1 forged a new political coalition.
0 marked the beginning of the dominance of northern industrialists. 


The Republicans emerged as a powerful political party in the
0 1890s.
0 1790s.
0 1930s.
1 1850s.
0 1820s. 

The Republican party began as the
0 party of big business interests.
1 principal anti-slavery party.
0 principal pro-slavery party.
0 party of states ¹ rights and silver money.
0 party of the New Deal. 

The Republicans had a long period as the country's dominant majority party, which ended
0 in 1992.
0 in 1980.
0 with the Civil War.
1 in 1932.
0 in 1896. 

The Depression of the 1930s gave rise to what is called
0 econo-politics.
0 party competition.
0 the Era of Divided Government.
1 the New Deal coalition.
0 the Republican resurgence. 

The New Deal coalition was responsible for electing and reelecting
0 Socialist party candidates.
1 Democrats.
0 Republicans.
0 Whigs.
0 Democratic-Republicans. 

Who was the president who brought together the original New Deal coalition in support of hiscandidacy?
0 Woodrow Wilson
0 Lyndon Johnson
0 John F. Kennedy
1 Franklin D. Roosevelt
0 Herbert Hoover 

The Republican party rose to prominence in the late 1850s as the
0 Free Silver party.
0 Party Of The Wealthy Elite.
0 Gold Standard party.
1 Anti-slavery party.
0 Party of Rural Farmers. 


The Republicans lost the election of 1932 primarily due to
0 the nomination of a popular war hero by the Democrats.
0 Hitler's election as chancellor of Germany and the Republicans ¹ failure to prevent it.
0 rising political and economic instability in Europe.
0 the failure of the Republicans to hold onto the support of urban industrialists.
1 President Herbert Hoover's handling of the Depression. 

Which of the following groups was NOT part of the New Deal coalition?
0 African Americans
0 Southerners
0 members of labor unions
1 wealthy New Englanders
0 Catholics and Jews 

Between the 1930s and the 1960s, people attracted to the Democratic party included
0 Protestants and Jews.
1 urban working classes and intellectuals.
0 northerners and the rich.
0 farmers and rural dwellers.
0 the college-educated and business owners. 

The New Deal coalition made the ________ party the minority party for decades.
0 Socialist
0 Federalist
0 Whig
1 Republican
0 Democratic 

Since 1968, American politics has been characterized by
1 divided government.
0 the New Deal coalition.
0 Republican control of both the Congress and presidency.
0 Democratic control of the presidency and Republican control of Congress.
0 Democratic control of both the Congress and presidency. 


People gradually moving away from both parties is referred to as
0 partisan drift.
0 coalition politics.
0 realignment.
1 dealignment.
0 alignment. 

Party dealignment is symbolized by
0 the 1992 election of a president and Congress of the same party.
0 the recent pattern of one-party control.
0 a renewed commitment to America's two major political parties.
1 the recent pattern of divided government.
0 the Republican takeover of Congress in 1994. 

Loyalty to a political party has ________ over the past thirty years.
0 increased slightly
0 increased significantly
1 decreased
0 remained about the same
0 virtually disappeared 

Over the past thirty years, there has been a marked rise in
0 support for both the major and minor parties.
0 support for the Democratic party.
0 support for both the Democratic and Republican parties.
0 support for minor parties.
1 party neutrality. 

What sort of realignment has occurred in the current party era?
1 a Southern realignment
0 a rural/urban realignment
0 a cultural realignment
0 an entire realignment
0 an age-based realignment 

In 1968 the Democratic party was torn apart, leaving the door to the presidency open forRepublican Richard Nixon primarily due to
0 the failure of President Johnson's War on Poverty.
0 the sudden evaporation of the New Deal coalition.
0 the abandonment of the Democratic party by African Americans.
1 President Johnson's Vietnam War policies.
0 the severity of the mid-60's recession. 


Party dealignment means the
0 the inability of the parties to deal with the nation's problems.
0 lack of party cohesion in Congress.
0 realignment of party coalitions.
0 increasing inability of minority parties to win elections.
1 decreasing influence of both parties on voters and government. 

Which of the following statements about third parties in the United States is FALSE?
0 Third parties often bring new issues to the political agenda.
1 Third parties are a rare phenomena in American history.
0 Third parties have brought new groups into the electorate.
0 Third-party candidates almost never win office in the United States.
0 Third parties have had important effects on American politics. 

Ross Perot's candidacies for president in 1992 and 1996 were an example of what type ofthird-party campaign?
0 a split-level party
0 a party espousing an extreme ideological position
0 a splinter party
1 a party serving as an extension of one individual's candidacy
0 none of the above 

In 2000, Green party candidate Ralph Nader forced more attention on ________ issues anddrew away a small percentage of votes from Al Gore.
0 budgetary
1 environmental
0 health
0 national security
0 welfare 

Which of the following is TRUE about most third-party campaigns in American history?
1 They almost never win office.
0 They occasionally succeed.
0 They usually become major political parties over time.
0 They have been most successful at promoting party dealignment.
0 They frequently are successful. 

An example of a splinter party would be
0 the Prohibitionist party.
0 the Poor Man's party of 1952.
0 the Libertarian party.
0 Ross Perot's United We Stand.
1 George Wallace's American Independents. 

Critically affecting the electoral college vote, bringing new issues to the public agenda, andventing popular discontent are important roles played by
0 intra-party factions.
0 splinter groups in a multiparty system.
0 the two-party system in thwarting extreme or unconventional views.
1 third parties in a two-party system.
0 parties based on a single issue in a multiple-issue society. 

The first true anti-slavery party was the
1 Free Soil party.
0 Anti-slavery party.
0 Populist party.
0 Progressive party.
0 Republican party. 

In many other democracies, the system of awarding seats in the national legislature, unlike inthe United States, is one of
0 single-member districts.
0 intellectual merit alone.
0 winner-take-all.
0 virtual representation.
1 proportional representation. 

A proportional representation system for electing members to a nation's legislature is morelikely to lead to a
0 situation like that of the United States, with only two major parties as rivals.
0 centralization and unification of political forces within the nation.
0 single party holding all the seats.
0 moderating of political conflict.
1 greater number of political parties holding seats. 

If the United States had a multiparty system,
0 third parties would come to dominate politics.
0 the necessity for coalitions would be eliminated.
1 each party would have more distinct policy positions.
0 people would have to pay dues to belong to a party.
0 each party would move to the ideological center. 


In proportional representation systems,
0 whoever gets the most votes wins the election.
0 each demographic group is allocated a certain number of positions in the government, in proportion to that group's percentage of the population.
0 coalition governments usually last for many years.
1 legislative seats are allocated according to each party's percentage of the nationwide vote.
0 every party gets represented in the legislature. 

The American two-party system promotes
0 the organization of political parties around special interests.
0 the weakness of centrist positions on policy issues.
1 moderation in conflict and ambiguous policy positions.
0 greater conflict, but clear policy choices.
0 competitive elections. 

Advocates of the ________ believe that parties should present distinct, comprehensiveprograms for governing the nation and carry them out.
0 differentiation approach
0 McGovern-Fraser Commission
1 responsible party model
0 rational-choice theory
0 party realignment 

The   responsible party   model holds that parties should
0 not use wedge issues that cause the other party's supporters to fight with each other during the campaign.
0 avoid making promises.
0 keep to middle-of-the-road positions.
1 present clear alternatives to voters.
0 avoid ideological stands. 

In what way do weak political parties affect the scope of government?
0 They make it difficult for politicians to help their constituents.
0 They allow presidents to expand the scope of foreign policy, while they decrease the domestic scope of government.
0 Being weak, they are unable to counteract the power of government so the scope of government grows.
1 Since it is harder for them to enact legislation, it is hard for them to either expand or decrease the scope of government.
0 They have had no real effect on the size and power of government. 

The weakening of party control over American politics
1 is in part due to the increasing influence of the media.
0 is leading to a multiparty system in this country.
0 threatens democracy.
0 threatens the very existence of political parties.
0 leads to fewer differences between party platforms. 


A(n) ________ is a party's official selection of a candidate to run for office.
0 appointment
1 nomination
0 conversion
0 imprimatur
0 endorsement 

In most advanced industrialized countries, election campaigns are
0 endless affairs, sometimes lasting a year or more.
0 not limited by law.
0 limited by law to two weeks.
1 limited by law to no more than two months.
0 limited by law to three months. 

Nomination for public office is
1 a party's selection of a candidate.
0 being appointed to a government post.
0 a win in key state primaries.
0 a victory in the general election.
0 the incumbent's selection of a candidate. 

The way in which candidates attempt to manipulate money, the media, and momentum toachieve the nomination is through
1 campaign strategy.
0 primaries.
0 charisma.
0 propaganda.
0 party support. 

In most advanced industrialized countries, national campaigns
0 are even less dignified than in the United States.
0 occur once every four years.
1 are limited by law to no more than two months.
0 are longer than American elections.
0 occur only once every seven years. 

The specific goal of the presidential nomination game is to
0 win the majority of votes cast in presidential primaries.
0 win the majority of votes cast in presidential caucuses.
1 win the majority of delegate votes in order to win the party nomination.
0 win a majority of votes in the electoral college.
0 beat the other party's candidate in the general election. 

The Democratic and Republican candidates for president are formally nominated by the
0 presidential caucuses.
0 presidential primaries.
0 electoral college.
1 national party conventions.
0 national committees. 

To be the presidential candidate of a major political party, a person must
0 win a majority of party primaries in the states.
0 first be nominated by the electoral college.
1 win a majority of the delegates at the party's national convention.
0 win a majority of the delegates elected from state caucuses.
0 have the endorsement of incumbent party leaders. 

The first presidential caucus of the campaign season is traditionally held in
0 Delaware.
0 California.
0 Minnesota.
0 New Hampshire.
1 Iowa. 

Caucuses are usually organized like
0 bi-legislatures.
0 the original Constitutional Convention.
0 winner-take-all election systems.
1 pyramids.
0 the electoral college. 


Today, state presidential caucuses are
0 open only to party activists who have spent a designated amount of time on behalf of the party or its candidates.
0 small meetings of the party's county leaders held to select national convention delegates with no other input.
0 special meetings of state party leaders who elect their state's delegates to the national convention.
1 open to all registered party voters, or those who claim party allegiance in states with no party registration.
0 held in most states in order to select national convention delegates. 


Today, most delegates to each major party's national convention are chosen by
0 state party chairpersons prior to any caucus or presidential primary.
1 state presidential primaries.
0 the previous national convention.
0 state presidential caucuses.
0 a lottery system. 

The presidential primary was begun in the early twentieth century, most strongly pushed by
0 Democratic party leaders in Congress.
0 Republican party leaders in Congress.
1 political reformers who wanted to take nominations out of the hands of party bosses.
0 party bosses who wanted to take nominations out of the hands of political reformers.
0 the members of the electoral college. 

The Democratic National Convention in ________ led to serious reforms in the methods it usedto choose its convention delegates.
0 1936
1 1968
0 1952
0 1984
0 1992 


The first presidential caucus is held in
1 Iowa.
0 Michigan.
0 New Hampshire.
0 Nebraska.
0 New York. 

In states with caucuses,
1 supporters of candidates try to get elected as delegates through a pyramid of meetings.
0 the state legislature selects the state's delegates to the national conventions.
0 party leaders select delegates according to their own candidate preferences.
0 candidates appoint supporters to serve as delegates.
0 delegates are chosen through general election of a candidate. 

Today, a majority of the delegates to the national convention are selected through
0 state party conventions.
0 party caucuses.
1 presidential primaries.
0 local party conventions.
0 state legislatures. 

The McGovern-Fraser Commission
0 chose presidential candidates for the Democratic party.
0 investigated violations of campaign finance law in 1968.
0 established the dates of presidential primaries.
1 had a mandate to make the Democratic party conventions more democratic.
0 strengthened the role of the party's national committee. 

The McGovern-Fraser Commission was set up to reform
0 the financing of federal election campaigns.
1 the rules for selecting delegates to the Democratic National Convention.
0 the rules for selecting delegates to both the Democratic and Republican National Conventions.
0 party fund-raising.
0 the rules for selecting delegates to the Republican National Convention. 

The McGovern-Fraser Commission made the delegate selection process of the Democraticparty more democratic by
0 giving the power of selecting delegates to party officials.
0 increasing the number of delegates chosen.
1 weakening the power of party leaders to choose convention delegates.
0 encouraging the use of presidential caucuses rather than primaries.
0 none of the above 

The opening up of the process to choose delegates to the Democratic National Convention inthe immediate aftermath of 1968 was spearheaded by
1 the McGovern-Fraser Commission.
0 the Kerner Commission.
0 an act of Congress.
0 President Johnson.
0 the Warren Commission. 

The addition of superdelegates to the Democratic national conventions was spearheaded by
0 those who felt the Warren Commission had led to unrepresentative delegate selection.
0 President Jimmy Carter.
0 the McGovern-Fraser Commission.
1 those who felt the McGovern-Fraser Commission had opened up the delegate selection process too much.
0 the Warren Commission. 

Few developments have changed American politics as much as
0 campaign finance reforms in the 1970s.
1 the proliferation of presidential primaries.
0 the creation of PACs.
0 expanded number of TV news shows.
0 talk radio. 

Which of the following was NOT a reason for the Democratic party adding superdelegates toits national nominating conventions?
0 the sense that party insiders and elected officials would be more likely to support the most electable candidate
0 the need for establishing a   peer review   to the process, with input from politicians who often know the candidates best
1 the insistence of the McGovern-Fraser Commission to have superdelegates play a major veto-like role
0 the feeling that earlier reforms had given too little say to the party's state and national leaders, with disastrous election results
0 none of the above 



The dates of the different presidential primaries and delegate allocations are established by
0 the national parties.
0 the Constitution.
0 federal law.
0 a joint agreement made by the major candidates in both parties, usually following a great deal of rancor.
1 state laws. 

For a candidate, the most important and desirable result of the early nomination contests is
0 doing well in a state highly representative of the entire United States population.
1 doing better than expected, thus winning an image as the party's frontrunner and holder of momentum.
0 winning the highest number of national convention delegates.
0 winning all of its electoral votes.
0 winning the highest number of votes. 

Running for the Republican presidential nomination in 1980, George Bush, announced in theearly going that he had the   big MO  î€„a reference to the fact that
0 he had won more delegates in Missouri.
1 he had the momentum having won in Iowa.
0 financial contributors were heavily on his side.
0 he had been endorsed by Moe Shepp, traditionally one of the Republican party's biggest campaign contributors.
0 he had won more votes in New Hampshire. 

In 2004 almost three-fourths of the Republican and Democrat delegates were chosen within________ of the New Hampshire primary.
0 six months
0 two weeks
0 two months
1 six weeks
0 four weeks 

The New Hampshire primary is important because
0 New Hampshire has a very large number of delegates.
0 New Hampshire is a particularly typical state.
0 it is the primary held closest to the time of the convention.
1 it is the first primary.
0 it involves the first caucuses. 

The rules determining the way in which the primaries are set up and the delegates areallocated are made by
0 the electoral college.
0 the Constitution.
0 Congress.
0 the Federal Election Commission.
1 state legislatures and state parties. 

Which of the following statements about the New Hampshire presidential primary is FALSE?
0 Considerable amount of money and time is spent on politicking in New Hampshire prior to the primary.
0 There is tremendous media coverage of the New Hampshire primary.
0 New Hampshire holds the first presidential primary of the year.
0 All the presidential candidates spend considerable time in New Hampshire prior to primary day.
1 none of the above 

The state that has disproportionate power because it holds the first presidential primary eachelection year is
0 New York.
0 California.
0 Iowa.
1 New Hampshire.
0 Rhode Island. 

The   Big Mo   refers to
1 achieving momentum in the nomination campaign.
0 the path-breaking presidential campaign of Morris   Mo   Udall.
0 the overwhelming need for money in a presidential campaign.
0 the importance of the Missouri primary in the presidential nomination campaign.
0 the moment in which a candidate receives enough delegates to receive the nomination. 

In achieving   momentum,   nothing helps a candidate more than
1 early unexpected primary and caucus victories.
0 winning where a win was expected.
0 a unanimous vote at the national nominating convention.
0 closing the gap in the last stages of the campaign.
0 strong competition. 

Which of the following is NOT a criticism of the current system of presidential primaries andcaucuses?
0 Prominent officeholders find it difficult to take time out from their current duties to run.
1 The media do not have enough of a role in this process.
0 Too much attention is paid to the early ones.
0 Money plays too big a role.
0 Many candidates drop out early before most states have held their primary or caucus. 

Iowa and New Hampshire have been especially important in the nomination process over thepast several decades because they help candidates to
0 build momentum.
0 generate media attention.
0 generate money.
1 all of the above
0 none of the above 

Approximately ________ of eligible voters cast ballots in presidential primaries.
0 75 percent
0 65 percent
0 35 percent
0 50 percent
1 20 percent 


In most caucus states, about ________ of the registered voters typically show up for partypresidential caucuses.
0 60 percent
0 20 percent
0 35 percent
1 5 percent
0 50 percent 

Critics of the primary and caucus system point to the fact that
0 disproportionate attention goes to the later caucuses and primaries.
0 no precedent for them is written into the Constitution.
0 only the best known candidates have a chance of winning the primaries and caucuses.
1 participation in primaries and caucuses is unrepresentative of the public at large.
0 none of the above 

Which of the following statements is FALSE?
0 About 5 percent of registered voters typically show up for caucuses.
0 About 50 percent of the population votes in the November presidential election.
1 Voters in primaries and caucuses tend to be representative of voters at large.
0 About 20 percent of the population votes in presidential primaries.
0 More people vote in primaries than attend caucuses. 

Critics of primaries and caucuses contend that the presidential   kingmakers   are now
0 party bosses.
0 the few who vote in the caucuses and primaries.
1 the media.
0 interest groups.
0 state party organizations. 

Proponents of a national primary argue that it would do each of the following EXCEPT
0 bring directness and simplicity to the nomination process.
0 no longer allow votes in one state to have more political impact than votes in another.
1 lengthen the time of the campaign.
0 concentrate media coverage and increase interest and understanding.
0 increase interest in more states. 

Critics of a national primary argue that
0 the campaign would be lengthened.
0 obscure candidates would receive too much of an advantage.
0 the media would have little impact.
1 no candidate would receive a majority, thus a run-off election would be needed.
0 All of these could happen. 


With the advent of television,
0 presidential caucuses were replaced by primaries.
0 television coverage of conventions increased steadily.
1 multiballot conventions died.
0 conventions became shorter.
0 All of these occurred. 

Conventions are not as important as they once were in that
1 we know who is going to win the presidential nomination before the convention meets.
0 there is less drama and fanfare.
0 rousing credentials fights and keynote speeches are a thing of the past.
0 they have not taken more than one ballot to nominate a president since 1952.
0 they no longer adopt party platforms. 

Over the years, television coverage of national party conventions has
0 received increasingly high Nielsen ratings.
0 become more dramatic.
0 shifted to local affiliate reporters focusing on their state delegations and away from the national network anchors.
1 been scaled back.
0 steadily increased. 

One way in which conventions are more important than they once were is that they
0 place limits on political representation.
0 choose the party's organizational leadership for the next four years.
0 now decide during the week of the convention, and through much political bickering, who their presidential nominee will be.
1 develop the party's policy positions.
0 involve more money and greater numbers of people. 

The party's platform is drafted
0 after the convention, by a committee made up exclusively of supporters of the winning nominee.
1 before the convention, by a committee whose members are chosen in rough proportion to each candidate's strength.
0 after the convention, by a committee of party members chosen in rough proportion to each candidate's strength.
0 during the convention, usually in the morning hours when cameras are not rolling.
0 by the party's presidential nominee in the days after the convention is over. 


The final major event of each party's national convention, during the last hour or so on thefourth and final night, is the
0 adoption of the party platform.
1 acceptance speech by the presidential candidate.
0 roll-call vote for the presidential nomination.
0 keynote speech.
0 inaugural ball and champagne party to honor the new nominee. 

By custom, the vice-presidential nominee is chosen
0 through a competitive wide open roll-call vote on the final day.
0 on the basis of the second largest number of delegates.
1 on the basis of the presidential nominee's recommendation.
0 by the electoral college.
0 by the platform committee. 

Providing select information and a request for money to lists of people who have supportedcandidates of similar views in the past is a frequently used political technique known as
0 soft money.
0 conversion.
1 direct mail.
0 fundraising.
0 caucusing. 

One of the most effective methods of raising money for an election campaign has been the useof
0 1-800 numbers.
0 mass meetings.
0 door-to-door solicitation.
1 direct mail.
0 television advertising. 

The largest expenditure in a campaign budget for the presidency or a statewide office todaywould almost certainly be
0 travel, hotels, and food for the candidate and campaign staff.
1 television advertising.
0 the salaries of the campaign manager, pollster, counsel, and other staff.
0 direct mail.
0 buttons, signs, car bumper stickers, billboards, and brochures. 

Most political coverage by the media during a presidential campaign
0 is the result of successful manipulation by the campaigns.
0 focuses on the substance of the key issues voters care about, and how the candidates stand on them.
1 deals with the campaign game: who's ahead in the polls, what candidate X's new strategy will be, and speculation.
0 is analysis of the interest groups and campaign contributors who are backing each candidate, and why they are backing them.
0 deals with the candidates ¹ personal character flaws and family. 

Most of the money spent on presidential campaigns these days is spent on
0 computer services.
0 air travel, hotels, and meals.
0 direct mail.
0 printing.
1 the media. 

News coverage of presidential campaigns tends to emphasize
1 campaign strategies and poll results.
0 the candidates ¹ positions on the issues.
0 the voting and performance records of the candidates in their current offices.
0 fair coverage of all the candidates.
0 debates between the candidates. 

Media coverage of a candidate's campaign is a function of
0 how candidates spend their advertising budget.
0 the   free   attention they get as newsmakers.
0 the nature of their policy agenda
1 both A and B
0 none of the above 

One of the major functions of policy advisors in a campaign is to
0 manage the campaign finances.
1 keep the candidate informed on the issues.
0 plan ad campaigns.
0 handle the details of candidate scheduling.
0 all of the above 

The member of a presidential campaign who helps reporters make their deadlines with storiesthat the campaign would like to see reported is the
1 press secretary.
0 media liaison.
0 propagandist.
0 director of public relations.
0 media consultant. 

The Federal Election Campaign Act
0 provided public financing for Senate and House races.
0 required broadcasters to provide free air time to each major candidate for federal office.
0 ended public financing for presidential campaigns.
1 required all candidates for federal office to disclose all contributions made to their campaigns.
0 removed spending limits from presidential campaigns. 

Which of the following did the Federal Election Campaign Act NOT do?
0 require disclosure of campaign contributions by all candidates for federal offices
0 provide public financing for the presidential nominees of both major parties
1 provide public financing of House and Senate races
0 limit presidential campaign spending
0 provide public financing of Senate races 


The administration of the campaign finance laws and the enforcement of compliance withtheir requirements is handled by the
0 Fair Political Practices Commission.
0 Campaign Finance Bureau of the Department of the Treasury.
0 Department of Justice.
1 Federal Election Commission.
0 Government Accounting Office. 

The group responsible for administering and enforcing the Federal Election Campaign Act isthe
1 Federal Election Commission (FEC).
0 National Committee for an Effective Congress.
0 Political Action Committee (PAC).
0 Federal Unethical Campaign Kommisars.
0 electoral college. 

According to the Federal Election Campaign Act, candidates must
1 disclose who contributed to their campaigns, and how the money was spent.
0 reject any contributions of Political Action Committees that exceed $1,000.
0 apply for federal funds if they are running in a presidential election.
0 raise their own campaign funds.
0 all of the above 

The 1974 Federal Election Campaign Act
0 placed legal limits on total campaign contributions.
1 placed legal limits on presidential campaign spending.
0 required private rather than public financing of primaries and elections.
0 prohibited disclosure of campaign fund sources.
0 all of the above 


The funds allocated to public financing of presidential campaigns based on income taxcheck-offs have
0 stayed at about the same level.
0 been ruled unconstitutional.
0 increased substantially.
1 decreased substantially.
0 been eliminated by Congress. 


________ resulted from an amendment in 1979 to the original Campaign Reform Act, whichallows parties to raise and spend money on voter registration and other campaign materialswithout limits on spending or the size of contributions that they can accept.
0 Party discretionary funding
0 The party expenditure exemption
1 Soft money
0 The expenditure waiver
0 Institutional assistance 

Donating $200,000 to a political party to help its presidential nominee in somewhat indirectways is
0 legal, and known as soft money.
1 illegal under the McCain-Feingold Act.
0 of unclear legality and the subject of a controversial and vague Supreme Court ruling.
0 legal, and known as a PAC contribution.
0 illegal under the Federal Election Campaign Act (FECA). 

One of the provisions of the McCain-Feingold Act of 2002 was to
0 increase the limit on individual contributions to $5,000.
0 increase the amount of federal money presidential candidates can spend.
0 increase the limit on   soft money   contributions.
1 increase the limit on individual contributions from $1,000 to $2,000.
0 increase the limit on individual contributions to $10,000. 


Soft money consists of money
0 provided through public financing.
1 for voter registration drives and campaign material at the grass-roots level.
0 that is illegally given to a campaign.
0 that individuals contribute to their own campaign.
0 given directly to a candidate. 

The hydraulic theory says that money always finds a way to get around legal obstacles. Thus,when the soft money loophole was closed, how did money continue to find its way intopolitical campaigns?
0 through the McCain-Feingold loophole
0 through dense money
1 through 527 Groups
0 through the garden hose loophole
0 through buying bulk purchases of books to avoid limits on campaign contributions 

PAC is an acronym for
0 the Partisan Activities Commission.
0 political access conveyance.
1 political action committee.
0 power-as-cash.
0 positive action campaign. 

The McCain-Feingold Act of 2002 did all of the following EXCEPT
0 barred groups from running   issue ad   within 60 days of a general election if they refer to a federal candidate and are not funded through a PAC.
0 banned soft money contributions.
0 increased the amount that individuals could give to candidates form $1,000 to $2,000.
0 indexed the limit on individual contributions to inflation in future years.
1 none of the above 


PACs are
0 committees formed to lobby government officials in behalf of their interests.
0 state commissions organized to reform campaign financing practices.
1 committees organized by interest groups to channel money to parties and candidates.
0 subcommittees of the FEC.
0 groups organized by political activists to increase voter participation. 

A very important ground rule concerning the behavior of political action committees is
0 they are not allowed to contribute to presidential campaigns.
0 there are strict limits on the number of candidates each PAC can contribute to.
1 all expenditures must be meticulously accounted for to the FEC.
0 they can only contribute to political parties or general funds, not to specific candidates.
0 both A and D 

Critics of the PAC system are concerned that
0 PACs are not regulated.
0 they tend to support only Republican candidates.
0 PACs are too weak and ineffective to contribute to a strong democracy.
0 only the largest and most powerful interest groups can afford to form PACs.
1 PACs may control what the electoral winners do once in office. 

Defenders of PACs point out that they
0 are limited to contributing only $1,000 per candidate.
0 can potentially buy votes.
0 have been very effective at enforcing campaign reform laws and reducing unethical campaign practices.
1 tend to support those who agree with them in the first place.
0 give most of their money to challengers. 

Most PACs give money to
0 candidates who disagree with them, but who are likely to be   bought.  
0 candidates of only one political party.
1 candidates who already agree with them in the first place.
0 the parties and let them distribute money among their candidates as they see fit.
0 challengers trying to unseat incumbents. 

According to political scientist Gary Jacobson's research, a Congressional incumbent whospends a tremendous amount of money to get reelected
1 is more likely to lose.
0 is more likely to win.
0 is likely to win by a landslide of over 70 percent of the vote.
0 is likely to get a higher percentage of the vote.
0 is no more or less likely to win than a candidate spending little money. 

Which of the following statements about Political Action Committees (PACs) is FALSE?
0 All PAC expenditures must be meticulously accounted for to the FEC.
0 PACs have proliferated in recent years.
1 The influence of PACs is particularly important in presidential campaigns.
0 Candidates need PACs because high-tech campaigning is expensive.
0 PACs contribute money before and after elections. 

The use of PAC money in presidential campaigns is
0 particularly influential.
1 less important than in Congressional campaigns.
0 able to   throw   the victory in the New Hampshire primary to the candidate favored by the most PACs.
0 unregulated.
0 illegal. 

Research has shown that the cost of American election campaigns is
0 high compared to other countries.
0 decreasing when the rising cost of living is taken into account.
1 per person, about the same as a DVD movie.
0 only about 25 cents per voter.
0 a national scandal. 

What bothers politicians most about the rising costs of high-tech campaigning is
1 that fund-raising has come to take up so much of their precious time, distracting them from legislation.
0 that so many good people can not afford to run for reelection.
0 they feel like whores who will do anything for a campaign contribution.
0 the increasing influence of PACs.
0 the declining number of PACs that they relied on for large campaign contributions. 

The relationship between campaign spending and electoral success is that
1 spending more than your opponent does not assure victory.
0 the candidate who spends the most is sure to win.
0 the more incumbents spend, the more likely they are to be reelected.
0 the amount of money spent and winning are entirely unrelated.
0 none of the above 

Who opposes public financing of campaigns the most?
0 liberals
0 conservatives
0 challengers
1 incumbents
0 independents 


Many political scientists believe that
0 the size of a campaign war chest is the sole determinant of who wins elections.
0 most voters are immune to reinforcement or activation in a campaign, but are susceptible to conversion.
1 politicians overestimate the power of how important a good campaign is to victory.
0 incumbents have no greater advantage in name recognition than most challengers.
0 politicians underestimate the power of how important a good campaign is to victory. 

Campaigns strengthen voter commitment to the usual party or the candidate they previouslysupported by emphasizing ________ as part of their campaign strategy.
0 conversion
1 reinforcement
0 activation
0 persuasion
0 direct mail 

Which of the following have been found to be most successfully affected by campaigns?
0 conversion
1 reinforcement and activation
0 reinforcement, activation, and conversion
0 reinforcement and conversion
0 activation and conversion 

Campaigns are most effective in
0 getting people to contribute time and money.
0 converting voters from one candidate to another.
1 reinforcing existing preferences toward candidates.
0 educating people on the issues.
0 shaping how the media will portray a candidate to the public. 

Most people pay little attention to campaigns,
0 and are as unfamiliar with the names of incumbents, as with the names of challengers.
0 and do not care about party identification of candidates.
1 and have a selective perception about events and candidates.
0 but are quite subject to having their minds changed by a strong campaign.
0 All of these are true. 

Which of the following factors weaken political campaigns ¹ effects on voters?
1 selective perception, party identification, and incumbent name recognition
0 negative advertising, party identification, and incumbent name recognition
0 campaign expenditures, party identification, and incumbent name recognition
0 selective mobilization, party identification, and incumbent name recognition
0 selective mobilization, negative advertising and incumbent name recognition 

The selective perception of most voters means that they
0 are susceptible to having their minds changed fairly easily by effective campaigns.
0 make rational choices about the purposive benefits to themselves of voting for a particular candidate.
0 keep a fairly open mind regarding the candidates during the election campaign, and choose based on rational analysis.
1 pay most attention to things they already agree with, and interpret events according to their own predispositions.
0 are skeptical of all candidates and view all campaigning as suspect. 

America's party nomination system could best be described as
1 open and entrepreneurial.
0 rational and bureaucratized.
0 informal, but rational.
0 a meritocracy.
0 an apprenticeship system. 

The process of selecting America's leaders has almost no downtime before it revs up all overagain. This is referred to as
1 the permanent campaign.
0 the revolving door.
0 revolving elections.
0 election mania.
0 accountability. 

Throughout American history, presidential campaigns have become
0 dirtier and dirtier.
0 shorter and shorter.
0 more and more secretive.
1 more and more democratic.
0 all of the above 

Compared to most other democratic systems, nominations and campaigns in the United States
0 require less commitment of time on the part of the candidate.
0 are decided more by party bosses than the general public.
1 tend to be more open.
0 tend to be shorter.
0 involve less money. 

Party outsiders have ________ getting elected in the United States than in other countries.
0 about the same chance of
0 no chance of
1 a much easier time
0 a somewhat more difficult time
0 a much less likely chance of 


The fact that candidates must tailor their appeals to the particular interest of each major statetends to result in
1 numerous campaign promises adding up to new government programs.
0 increased public interest in the campaign.
0 limiting the scope of government.
0 a more open and democratic process.
0 a tilt toward states ¹ rights at the expense of the national government. 


Legitimacy in terms of American elections means
0 the public is satisfied with the qualifications and the policy positions of the candidates.
0 the public is nearly unanimously happy with the results.
1 the election is nearly unanimously accepted as a fair and free method to select political leaders.
0 the public is generally not satisfied with the candidates, the results, or the methods by which elections are held.
0 the best candidate is selected. 

Elections in the United States perform which of the following functions?
0 make or ratify legislation
0 select party nominees
0 select officeholders from among party nominees
0 both B and C
1 all of the above 

Which of the following functions do elections LEAST serve?
0 selecting public officials
1 making and coordinating public policy
0 providing regular access to political power
0 providing legitimacy to the political system
0 connecting citizens to government officials 

California's famous Proposition 13, in which voters frustrated by a lack of action by theirlegislature forced an issue on the ballot and voted to limit the rise in property taxes, was anexample of
0 a direct primary.
0 an indirect primary.
1 an initiative.
0 a referendum.
0 a voter override. 

California's Proposition 209, which intended to end affirmative action programs in the state, isan example of
0 a direct primary.
0 an indirect primary.
1 an initiative.
0 a referendum.
0 a voter override. 

Daniel Smith argues that initiatives typically stem from
0 broad public demand for the policy.
1 the actions of a dedicated policy entrepreneur.
0 the natural emergence of policy issues.
0 responsive elected officials, working in coalition.
0 none of the above 

The initiative is put on the ballot as a result of
0 the governor's order.
0 a Supreme Court ruling.
1 a petition signed by a certain percentage of the voters in the previous election.
0 public opinion polls showing strong support for a certain measure not acted upon by the legislature.
0 a special, legally constituted convention voting to place it there. 

Of the following, which is the most direct form of democracy?
1 initiative
0 referendum
0 direct primary
0 presidential election
0 recall 


Examples of issues addressed in recent initiatives include all of the following EXCEPT
0 ending affirmative action.
0 setting maximum claim sizes.
0 paying college graduates to reside in a state for a number of years.
1 election day registration.
0 none of the above 

An election whereby voters are given the chance to approve or disapprove some legislative actor constitutional amendment is called
1 a referendum.
0 an initiative petition.
0 a direct primary.
0 a direct election.
0 a ratification election. 


Which of the following is NOT true about elections in American society?
0 They socialize and institutionalize political activity.
0 They provide regular access to political power.
0 They are accepted as legitimate, fair, and free methods to select political leaders.
1 The vast majority of eligible citizens cast ballots, even for local races.
0 none of the above 

In the 1800 election presidential candidates were nominated by
1 their parties ¹ elected representatives in Congress.
0 their parties ¹ nominating convention.
0 their parties ¹ voters in primary elections.
0 the electoral college.
0 the president. 


Which of the following statements about the 1800 presidential election is TRUE?
1 The 1800 election was ultimately decided in the House of Representatives.
0 The 1800 election was the first one in which the candidates were chosen by party conventions.
0 For the first time the focus of the 1800 election was on the citizen voters.
0 The candidates in the 1800 election vigorously campaigned in each of the states.
0 all of the above 

The election of 1800 was
0 decided by the direct vote of the people.
0 decided by the electoral college.
1 decided by the House of Representatives.
0 overturned by the Supreme Court.
0 decided by the full Congress. 

The presidential election of 1800 was
0 the first use of direct primaries in the United States.
0 decided by the House of Representatives after a tie in the electoral college.
0 notable for the importance of key convention speeches to swing the votes in the electoral eollege.
1 the first transition of power between parties accomplished by voters ¹ ballots in the history of the world.
0 influenced by media intent on forcing incumbent out of office. 

The presidential election of 1800 represents the first
0 use of party nominating conventions.
0 time the Senate elected the president.
0 use of the electoral college.
1 peaceful transfer of power in the world between parties via the electoral process.
0 time the voters directly elected the presidential electors. 

In the original constitutional system,
1 each presidential elector cast two ballots and the top vote-getter was named president and the runner-up became vice president.
0 the Senate elected the president and the House of Representatives elected the vice president.
0 each presidential elector cast one ballot for one of the president/vice president teams running.
0 the state legislatures elected the president and vice president, with the candidate getting the second most votes becoming vice president.
0 the president, once elected by the electoral college, chose the vice president. 

Which of the following is TRUE of the presidential election of 1800?
0 The candidates traveled throughout the smaller number of United States at the time to campaign for votes.
0 It was a gentlemanly contest in which partisans on both sides showed respect for the opposition.
0 It was carefully and objectively covered in the newspapers of the day, with logical reasoning and respect for both candidates in articles and editorials.
1 It was the first peaceful transfer of power between parties via the electoral process in the history of the world.
0 all of the above 

In the electoral college vote in the election of 1800, there was a tie between
0 Thomas Jefferson and John Adams.
0 John Adams and James Madison.
0 John Adams and Aaron Burr.
1 Thomas Jefferson and Aaron Burr.
0 George Washington and Thomas Jefferson. 

The issue of free silver (to increase the amount of currency in circulation) was championed inthe election of 1896 by ________, whose most famous oration was his   Cross of Gold   speech atthe Democratic national convention.
0 Grover Cleveland
0 William McKinley
1 William Jennings Bryan
0 Theodore Roosevelt
0 Woodrow Wilson 

In 1896, who liked silver money?
1 debtors
0 bankers
0 exporters
0 Eastern manufacturers
0 coin collectors and dealers 

The first peaceful transfer of power between parties via the electoral process in the history ofthe world occurred as a result of the presidential election of
0 1796.
1 1800.
0 1860.
0 1896.
0 1789. 

The election of 1896 was largely fought over the issue of
0 war.
1 economics.
0 race relations.
0 government corruption.
0 the ownership of land in the west. 

Which of the following statements about the election of 1896 is FALSE?
0 The main issue in the election of 1896 was the gold standard and tariffs.
0 William Jennings Bryan broke with tradition and campaigned extensively in person.
1 The election resulted in the Democrats becoming firmly entrenched as the majority party in the Northeast and Midwest.
0 Nearly 80 percent of the eligible electorate voted in 1896.
0 none of the above 

The winner of the presidential election of 1896 was
0 Theodore Roosevelt.
1 William McKinley.
0 Grover Cleveland.
0 William Jennings Bryan.
0 Ulysses Grant. 

The election of 1896 left a legacy of a political alignment that endured for several decades,wherein
0 the Democrats won the more populous Northeast and Midwest, and the Republicans won in the South and West.
1 the Democrats won the South and West, while the Republicans won in the more populous Northeast and Midwest.
0 the Democrats won the Midwest and the South, while the Republicans won in the Northeast and West.
0 the Democrats won in the Northeast and West, while the Republicans won in the Northeast and South.
0 the Republicans swept the South, and the Democrats won in all other regions. 

Because Bush's lead over Gore in the initial count was less than one-tenth of one percent,Florida law mandated
0 that the Florida state legislature vote to declare Bush the winner.
0 the outcome of the election be determined by the Florida Supreme Court.
0 the Secretary of State to certify the results.
1 an automatic recount.
0 a thirty-day extension for absentee ballots. 

In Bush v. Gore (2000), the United States Supreme Court ruled that
0 the Florida Supreme Court did not have jurisdiction over the presidential election legal issues.
1 although a recount was legal, the same (or more precise) standards for evaluating ballots would have to be applied in all counties.
0 the butterfly ballot was unconstitutional.
0 the time used to recount ballots could extend past December 12, when the Florida electors would meet.
0 punch card ballots were illegal if not used in all counties. 

According to exit polls, ________ was a major reason voters selected Bush in 2004.
0 welfare reform
0 health care reform
1 the war on terrorism
0 freedom of speech
0 strategic voting 

In the 2004 election, John Kerry won votes among those most concerned with
1 the economy, health care, and education.
0 the fairness of the tax system.
0 the environment, the economy, and transportation issues.
0 the environment and urban affairs.
0 civil rights, the environment, and the economy. 

Suffrage means
1 the right to vote.
0 turning out to vote.
0 voting for the winner.
0 voting for the loser.
0 the struggle for equal rights for women. 

Which of the following is TRUE about American elections over the past 100 years?
0 The suffrage has broadened, and the turnout has increased.
1 The suffrage has broadened, and the turnout has decreased.
0 The suffrage has narrowed, and the turnout has increased.
0 The suffrage has narrowed, and the turnout has decreased.
0 Suffrage has broadened, but there has been no change in turnout. 

Suffrage refers to
0 a type of election unique to the United States.
1 the right to vote.
0 a voter registration system.
0 voter turnout rates.
0 voting procedures in the electoral college. 

As the right to vote has been extended,
0 voter turnout has increased proportionately.
1 proportionately fewer of those eligible have chosen to vote.
0 the number of candidates running for office has increased.
0 voter turnout has actually remained about the same.
0 the scope of American government has shrunk. 

The nearly two centuries of American electoral history has been characterized by
0 consistently close elections.
0 increasing voter turnouts.
1 expansion of the right to vote.
0 a proliferation of presidential candidates.
0 all of the above 

The high point of voter turnout in the United States was in
1 1896.
0 1932.
0 1972.
0 1968.
0 1960. 

People are more likely to vote for all of the following reasons EXCEPT if they
0 have a high sense of civic duty.
0 have a high sense of political efficacy.
0 are able to see policy differences that affect their interests.
1 believe that some policies of one party are balanced by other policies of the other party.
0 none of the above 

Anthony Downs ¹ theory of rational voting behavior predicts that people will vote if they
0 can afford the time and energy to do so.
1 think one party will give them more policy benefits than the other.
0 think their vote will make the difference for a particular candidate.
0 identify with a particular candidate, even though they doubt that one vote can make a difference.
0 feel obligated to do so. 

Those largely indifferent to the results of an election, but who decide to vote anyway to showsupport for democratic government are called ________ voters.
0 guilt-driven
1 civic-duty
0 regime-maintenance
0 patriotic disaffected
0 disaffected 

The greater one's sense of political efficacy, the
0 less likely one is to vote.
1 more likely one is to vote.
0 greater one's chance of being defeated in an election.
0 less likely one is to view the election process in the United States as legitimate.
0 more likely one is to see differences between the parties. 

Political efficacy refers to the belief that
0 the costs of voting outweigh the benefits.
0 significant policy differences exist between the parties.
0 one should always support democratic government.
1 ordinary people can influence the government.
0 government is very inefficient and needs to be streamlined. 

Largely to prevent corruption associated with stuffing ballot boxes, states adopted ________around the turn of the twentieth century.
0 the electoral college
0 primary elections
0 voting machines
1 voter registration
0 the secret ballot 

Voter registration was begun around the turn of the twentieth century
0 to encourage voting through advance notice.
0 by party bosses to discourage people from voting.
1 to make elections more ethical.
0 to allow for the secret ballot.
0 to discourage patronage. 


Compared to other countries, the United States holds ________ elections for various offices.
0 far fewer
0 somewhat fewer
0 about the same number of
1 more
0 twice as many 

A major reason cited for America's level of voter turnout compared to other industrializedcountries is
0 bad weather in certain parts of the United States on election day.
0 greater interest in democracy in the United States.
1 registration is more cumbersome in the United States.
0 registration is more cumbersome in other nations.
0 Americans ¹ high sense of political efficacy. 

Compared to other industrialized democracies, the United States has a ________ voter turnout.
0 much higher
0 slightly higher
0 slightly lower
1 much lower
0 rising 

Which of the following countries has a lower voter turnout rate than the United States?
0 Australia
0 Great Britain
1 Switzerland
0 Italy
0 France 

Which of the following countries has the lowest voter turnout rate?
0 Australia
1 United States
0 Italy
0 France
0 Bulgaria 

Voter turnout in the United States is much lower than in other countries in part because
1 of the unique American requirement of voter registration.
0 Americans are asked to vote less often and do not sustain interest in the electoral process.
0 Americans vote for fewer political offices and lack a sense of political efficacy.
0 the choice offered Americans is greater than in other countries, which confuses potential voters.
0 of the strident positions taken by the parties, which alienate middle-of-the-road voters. 

Which of the following statements is FALSE?
0 Unlike the United States, the governments of most democracies take the responsibility of seeing to it that all of their eligible citizens are on the voting lists.
0 American government asks citizens to vote far more often than most democracies.
1 Americans are expected to vote for a much narrower range of political offices than most democracies.
0 The choice offered Americans at elections is not as great as in other democracies.
0 none of the above 

Which of these would be most likely to vote?
1 a well-educated, middle-aged government worker
0 a young southerner without a high school diploma
0 a well-educated senior citizen who used to work for a big corporation
0 a young southern high school teacher
0 a middle-aged professor at a private university 

Which of the following is INCORRECT?
1 Congress requires voter registration nationwide.
0 The Motor Voter Act allows eligible voters to register by checking a box on their driver's license application.
0 In North Dakota, you don ¹t have to register to vote.
0 In a few states, you can register to vote on election day.
0 Some states let you register at supermarkets. 

Among the states that allow voter registration at the polls on election day, voter turnout ratesare
1 higher than in other states.
0 impossible to compute.
0 no different than in other states.
0 lower than the national average.
0 declining over time and at a higher rate than in other states. 

Approximately how many states allow voters to register at the polls on election day?
1 6
0 14
0 34
0 44
0 49 


The impact of the Motor Voter Act of 1993 was evidenced in
0 higher registration and higher turnout in 1996 and 2000.
1 higher registration and lower turnout in 1996 and 2000.
0 no changes in either registration or turnout in 1996 and 2000.
0 lower registration and higher turnout in 1996 and 2000.
0 none of the above 

The group of people with the lowest voter turnout rate is
0 college graduates.
1 young people.
0 women.
0 senior citizens over 70.
0 union members. 

According to the text, the most important factor affecting voter turnout is
1 education.
0 gender.
0 ideology.
0 race.
0 geography. 

Highly educated individuals are more likely to vote because
0 they are smarter.
1 they see more policy differences between candidates.
0 they have a lower sense of political efficacy.
0 most of them are white males.
0 they have more influence. 

Which of the following statements about voter participation is FALSE?
0 As people age, their likelihood of voting increases.
0 Minority groups with high levels of income and education have a higher turnout rate than whites with comparable status.
1 Men are more likely to vote than women.
0 Individuals who have lived at the same address longer are more likely to vote than those who have moved.
0 none of the above 

Which of the following characteristics would make one more likely to vote in an election?
1 having a college degree
0 being a young adult
0 having a low income
0 being a college student
0 bring a welfare recipient 


The mandate theory of elections
0 is based on the economic theory of rational decision making.
0 explains voters ¹ decisions according to an evaluation of the candidates ¹ personality.
1 says that people vote for candidates because they want them to carry out certain policies.
0 explains voters ¹ decisions according to party identification.
0 is based on the sociological theory of irrational behaviorism. 

The mandate theory of elections is most often cited as the proper way to view elections by
0 the defeated candidate.
1 the winning candidate.
0 political scientists.
0 everybody.
0 the media. 

The mandate theory of elections is the idea that
0 a candidate must get at least sixty percent of the vote to win.
0 a candidate must get a majority of the votes cast (fifty percent plus one) in order to take office.
1 the election winner has authorization from the voters to carry out his or her promised policies.
0 in order to improve turnout rates in the United States, voting must be made a legal requirement of all citizens, with the failure to vote resulting in a small fine.
0 a candidate must get at least seventy-five percent of the vote to win. 

________ are crucial for many voters because they provide a regular perspective throughwhich voters can view the political world.
1 Party identifications
0 Civic duties
0 Direct primary elections
0 Initiative petitions
0 Party platforms 

Political scientists tend to focus on each of the following major elements of voters ¹ decisionsEXCEPT
0 voters ¹ party identification.
1 voters ¹ ideology and world view.
0 voters ¹ evaluation of the candidates.
0 the match between voters ¹ policy positions and those of the candidates and parties.
0 none of the above 


Over the last five decades, voting based primarily on party identification has
0 completely disappeared.
1 declined sharply.
0 stayed almost exactly the same.
0 increased.
0 increased sharply. 


Research by Rosenberg and McCafferty discovered that
0 a candidate's image and appearance is the most important factor in how a person votes.
0 less educated voters are more likely to view candidates in terms of their personal attributes.
1 it is possible to manipulate a candidate's appearance in a way that affects voters ¹ choices.
0 a candidate's image and appearance has no real impact on voting behavior.
0 none of the above 

Which of these is the least important dimension of a candidate's image?
1 intelligence
0 integrity
0 reliability
0 competence
0 experience 

________ occurs when people base their choices in an election on their own issue preferences.
0 Civic duty
0 Suffrage
0 Retrospective voting
1 Policy voting
0 Agenda setting 

A voter supporting a candidate based specifically on comparing the candidate's stances on theissues of abortion rights, health care, and government aid to education to the voter's ownpreferences on such issues is an example of
0 retrospective voting.
1 policy voting.
0 civic duty.
0 initiative.
0 agenda setting. 

Research has found that those most likely to view the candidates in terms of their personalattributes are
0 minority voters.
1 college-educated voters.
0 low-income voters.
0 women voters.
0 non-voters. 

Which of the following is TRUE about the electoral college?
1 On very rare occasions, an elector has voted differently from the popular vote winner of his state.
0 It is scheduled to be phased out in 2006, though some still argue its usefulness and want to rescind the phase-out.
0 It is used in nearly half of the democratic nations around the world.
0 An elector has never voted differently from the popular vote winner of his state.
0 none of the above 



As provided in the Constitution, how are electoral votes allocated for each state?
0 Each state has as many electoral votes as it has members in the House of Representatives.
0 Each state has as many electoral votes as it has members in both the House and the Senate.
1 Each state has as many electoral votes as it has members in the Senate.
0 Each state is proportioned to their population, with all states having at least one vote.
0 Each state casts two electoral votes. 


If no candidate receives an electoral college majority,
0 a runoff election is held nationwide between the top two vote-getters.
0 the candidate with the plurality of electoral votes is automatically elected.
1 the House of Representatives chooses among the top three electoral vote winners.
0 the electoral college takes a second ballot between the top two vote -getters, and the candidate who wins the majority is elected.
0 Congress is free to elect the president. 


Except in Maine and Nebraska, the electoral college system operates in each state on theprinciple of allocating electoral votes on the basis of
1 winner-take-all.
0 proportional representation.
0 allocating electoral votes based on the winner in each congressional district.
0 a mixture of winner-take-all and proportional representation.
0 majority rule. 

Which of the following statements about the electoral college is FALSE? w
0 Each state has as many electoral votes as it has United States senators and representatives.
1 Every state has a winner-take-all system where electors vote as a bloc for the winner.
0 Electors meet in their states in December and mail their votes to the vice president.
0 If no candidate receives an electoral majority, then the election is thrown into the House of Representatives.
0 Some states have a winner take all system where electors vote as a bloc for the winner. 

If a presidential candidate does not receive a majority of electoral college votes, then thepresident is chosen
0 by popular vote.
0 by the Justices of the Supreme Court.
1 by the House with one vote for each state.
0 by the Senate with two votes for each state.
0 by majority vote of the entire Congress in a joint session. 

Research on voting behavior has shown that
1 policy voting has become somewhat easier than in the past.
0 a candidate's image is not as important today as it was in the past.
0 Americans tend to identify with the underdog.
0 party identification has become more important in voting decisions.
0 policy voting has become harder than in the past. 


Which is FALSE regarding the electoral college?
1 Whoever wins the most votes in the electoral college wins, even if that isn ¹t a majority.
0 Maine and Nebraska do not use the   winner-take-all   system.
0 Electors can vote for whomever they want, regardless of how their state's voters voted.
0 In most states ALL the electors vote for whomever won the most votes in their state, even if that wasn ¹t a majority.
0 The electors themselves are selected by state parties. 

The greater the policy differences between the candidates,
0 the closer the election.
1 the more likely voters will be able to steer government policies by their choices.
0 the lower the turnout in the general election.
0 the more likely voters will make choices based on personality traits.
0 the higher the voter turnout in the election. 

In ________, incumbents who provide desired results are rewarded; those who fail to do so arepunished.
0 indirect primaries
0 initiatives
0 referendums
1 retrospective voting
0 incentive voting 

If engaged in retrospective voting, an individual would ask:
1 What have you done for me lately?
0 Who will do more for me next year?
0 Who is the more attractive candidate?
0 Why should I vote at all?
0 Who will be lowering taxes? 

When President Herbert Hoover and the Republicans were crushed in the election of 1932,voters were responding to the severity of the Great Depression under Hoover's presidency by
1 retrospective voting.
0 indirect primary voting.
0 direct primary voting.
0 initiative.
0 irrational choice voting. 


The type of public policy that seems to have the greatest effect on elections today is
0 foreign policy.
0 social policy.
1 economic policy.
0 military policy.
0 racial policies. 

Elections have a tendency to expand the scope of government because
0 so many people become involved in the process.
1 voters like to feel that they are sending a message to government to accomplish something.
0 so much money is involved in campaigns.
0 elections open opportunities for more government employment.
0 because they are so expensive to conduct. 

While the threat of electoral punishment constrains policymakers, it also helps to increasegeneralized support for
0 the private sector.
0 individualistic, rather than, collective policy solutions.
1 government and its powers.
0 incumbents who have done a good job.
0 unelected government officials in the bureaucracy. 


The case involving Eli Lilly and Company illustrates how
0 little influence special interests actually have on Congress.
0 special interests can still bribe members of Congress.
1 special interests ¹ campaign contributions can influence congressional action.
0 Congress can regulate the activities of special interests.
0 the increasing importance of multinational corporations. 

According to James Madison in Federalist Paper No. 1, the way to prevent any one group fromhaving too much power is to
0 eliminate most groups.
1 increase the scope and number of groups.
0 strictly regulate them.
0 make them unconstitutional.
0 none of the above 

Since the 1960s, the number of interest groups has
0 remained constant.
1 risen rapidly.
0 declined slightly.
0 declined sharply.
0 fluctuated up and down as new issues developed and others faded away. 

The right of interest groups to organize is
0 protected by the Constitution.
0 protected by the Federal Election Campaign Act.
0 protected by state laws.
1 protected by the Bill of Rights.
0 none of the above 


An organization of people with similar policy goals entering the political process to try toachieve those aims is called
0 a political party.
0 a political action committee.
1 an interest group.
0 a collective.
0 a political corporation. 

Which of the following is NOT typical of American interest groups?
0 They frequently look to the bureaucracy or the judicial process to achieve their policy goals.
1 They run their own slate of candidates for office in many parts of the country.
0 Most have a handful of key policies to push, and are policy experts in those areas.
0 Unlike political parties, they are not faced with the constraint of trying to appeal to everyone.
0 They mostly represent diffuse, non-economic interests. 

American political parties differ from interest groups in that parties
0 are policy specialists.
1 are policy generalists.
0 are policy-driven.
0 do not take positions on policy issues.
0 have a narrower scope than interest groups. 

One of the main differences between American political parties and interest groups is that
0 interest groups are concerned with more issues.
0 interest groups concentrate on only one policy arena.
1 political parties run candidates for office.
0 interest groups limit their membership.
0 political parties are policy specialists. 



An interest group is more likely to form its own political party where
0 voters choose their legislators in single-member districts.
0 voters choose their legislators in dual-member districts.
1 voters choose their legislators using proportional representation.
0 the government has a bicameral legislature.
0 there is a strong two-party system, and the major parties ignore their demands. 

According to ________ theorists, interest groups compete and counterbalance one another inthe political marketplace.
0 elitist
0 hyperelitist
1 pluralist
0 hyperpluralist
0 free market 

Which of the following statements is FALSE?
0 With proportional representation systems, all it takes is between one and five percent of the vote for a party to win seats in the national legislature.
0 In many Scandinavian countries, farmers ¹ parties have long been in existence.
0 Many new interest groups in Europe have formed parties on the basis of shared values.
1 Green parties in Europe have never been able to win enough votes to enter the national legislature.
0 Parties are more like interest groups in Europe than in the U.S. 

The successes of civil rights and women's rights groups in redirecting the course of publicpolicy, once they were organized, is pointed to as evidence to support the ________ theory thatAmerican politics is open and not a problem.
1 pluralist
0 hyperpluralist
0 elite
0 hyperelitist
0 free market 

The group theory of politics offered by pluralist theorists argues all of the following EXCEPT
0 groups provide a key link between people and government.
0 no one group is likely to become too dominant.
1 groups are all of equal strength.
0 groups usually play by the rules of the game.
0 different groups win at different times. 

The idea that just a few groups have all the power is associated with
1 elite theory.
0 pluralist theory.
0 hyperpluralist theory.
0 democratic theory.
0 syndicalism. 



The idea that interest group activity brings representation to all is associated with
0 elite theory.
1 pluralist theory.
0 hyperpluralist theory.
0 democratic theory.
0 republicanism. 

Which of the following theories offers the most positive interpretation of the effect of interestgroups on American democracy?
1 pluralist
0 hyperpluralist
0 elite
0 hyperelitist
0 free market 

Pluralists argue that lobbying
0 is dominated by wealthy corporations and the wealthiest individuals and is a danger to the democratic system.
1 is open to all and is therefore not to be regarded as a problem.
0 by so many interest groups who get what they want indicates that the relation between groups and government has grown too cozy.
0 must be suspended until tighter regulations can be put into place to protect the public interest.
0 has no effect on policymaking. 

________ theorists are impressed by how insignificant most organized interest groups are.
0 Pluralist
0 Hyperpluralist
1 Elitist
0 Pluralist and hyperpluralist
0 Deconstruction 


The ________ theorists argue that the power of the few is fortified by an extensive system ofinterlocking directorates, and that wealthy corporations prevail when it comes to majordecisions by government.
0 pluralist
0 hyperpluralist
1 elitist
0 hyperelitist
0 pyramid 


The presence and power of multinational corporations illustrates
0 elite theory.
0 pluralist theory.
1 hyperpluralist theory.
0 democratic theory.
0 global unity theory. 

Elite theorists emphasize the power of
0 subgovernments.
1 business leaders.
0 congressional staff members.
0 public interest lobbies.
0 presidents. 


Interest group liberalism is criticized especially by ________ theorists.
0 pluralist
1 hyperpluralist
0 elitist
0 hyperelitist
0 social-conservative 



Interest group liberalism is promoted by
0 ideologically liberal interest groups and not conservative groups.
0 one group winning and another losing in the competition for government action or funding.
1 subgovernments.
0 hyperpluralists.
0 all of the above 

The criticism that government refuses to make tough choices between X or Y, insteadpretending there is no need to choose and trying to favor both is most often made by ________theorists.
0 pluralist
1 hyperpluralist
0 elitist
0 hyperelitist
0 rational choice 

The idea that too many groups are getting too much of what they want is associated with
0 elite theory.
0 pluralist theory.
1 hyperpluralist theory.
0 democratic theory.
0 proliferation theory. 


All subgovernments have the same goal
0 protecting the public interest.
0 attacking the government head-on.
1 protecting their self-interest.
0 electing the most qualified people to office.
0 to join the main government. 

Subgovernments are composed of key interest group leaders interested in policy X, thegovernment agency in charge of administering policy X, and the ________ handling policy X.
1 congressional committees and subcommittees
0 federal courts
0 public relations officers
0 political candidates
0 local governments 

Which of the following is NOT one of the major elements of the subgovernment system at thenational level?
0 interest group
0 congressional committee
1 federal court
0 federal agency
0 bureaucrats 


A hyperpluralist interpretation of group politics would maintain that
0 groups weak in one resource can substitute other resources to influence policy decisions.
1 groups have become so powerful that government ends up aiding every possible interest.
0 the fact that there are numerous groups proves nothing, because groups are unequal in power.
0 groups provide a key linkage between people and government.
0 All of these are true. 

Which of the following ideas is NOT associated with hyperpluralism?
0 Groups have become too powerful in the political process.
0 Interest group liberalism is aggravated by numerous subgovernments.
0 Trying to please every group results in contradictory and confusing policy.
1 Political power is highly concentrated.
0 The dominance of an economic elite. 

A(n) ________ group is composed of all people who might be group members because theyshare some common interest.
1 potential
0 interest
0 actual
0 single-issue
0 latent 

The free-rider problem refers to
0 unrelated amendments being added to a piece of legislation in order to bypass usual procedures.
1 potential members of a group failing to join the actual group, as they know they will receive the same benefits whether they are active members or not.
0 legislators who face no election opponents, and thus are automatically reelected.
0 mass transit scofflaws who endanger government aid to subways, buses, and commuter trains by not being officially counted.
0 welfare fraud and the costs it imposes on government and taxpayers. 

Part of Olson's Law of Large Groups is the argument that
1 the larger the potential group, the less likely potential members are to contribute.
0 the larger the potential group, the more likely potential members are to contribute.
0 potential group size does not have any measurable affect on the willingness of potential members to contribute.
0 an actual group and a potential group are virtually the same when it comes to effectiveness.
0 the smaller the group the less likely the potential members are to contribute. 

According to Olson's Law of Large Groups,
1 the larger the group, the further it will fall short of providing an optimal amount of a collective good.
0 the smaller the group, the further it will fall short of providing an optimal amount of a collective good.
0 the more levels of authority within a group, the more faith its members will have in it.
0 the more levels of authority within a group, the less faith its members will have in it.
0 the larger the group, the more likely it is to win. 

________ helps to explain why public interest lobbies have relatively small proportions ofactual members.
1 The free-rider problem
0 Special interest liberalism
0 The rise of political action committees
0 Tougher regulation of all lobbyists
0 Olson's Law of Large Groups 

According to Olson's Law of Large Groups,
0 the larger the group, the more effective it will be.
1 the smaller the group, the more effective it will be.
0 the size of a group does not determine its effectiveness, the leadership structure is the key.
0 all groups have a life cycle of birth, growth, maintenance, and decline, although many never decline completely.
0 large groups are more democratic. 

Consumer organizations suffer from
0 amicus curiae briefs.
0 class action suits.
1 Olson's Law of Large Groups.
0 right-to-work laws.
0 hyperpluralism. 

The biggest obstacle to the effectiveness of large groups is the
0 difficulty of finding effective leadership.
1 problem of raising funds and attracting government support.
0 formation of counter-groups to oppose them.
0 discrepancy between potential and actual membership.
0 government regulations on lobbying activities. 

All people who might be group members because they share some common interest make up
0 an actual group.
1 a potential group.
0 a collective group.
0 an interest group.
0 a probable group. 

Which of the following groups has the largest potential membership?
0 National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
1 National Organization for Women
0 American Medical Association
0 Air Transport Association of America
0 American Political Science Association 

Which of the following groups claims the smallest share of its potential members?
1 National Consumers League
0 United States Savings and Loan League
0 Tobacco Institute
0 Air Transport Association
0 American Medical Association 

A   collective good   refers to
0 goods and services that are publicly owned.
0 benefits that accrue to the group that sought them.
1 something of value that benefits both the actual and potential members of a group.
0 a public policy that is in the public interest.
0 goods and services collected for the needy. 

An example of a collective good is
0 food.
0 employment.
1 clean air.
0 housing.
0 all of the above 

The free-rider problem refers to the difficulty of
0 small groups in raising enough money to influence policy.
1 groups in organizing all their potential members.
0 actual groups in collecting dues from members.
0 potential groups in receiving their share in collective goods.
0 all taxpayers having to pay for public services and payments that go only to the poor. 



According to Mancur Olson, small interest groups generally are ________ compared to allother groups.
0 insignificant
0 incoherent
1 less focused
0 more effective
0 more democratic 

An advantage of single-issue groups is their
0 financial resources.
0 pool of potential members.
0 pool of actual members.
1 intensity.
0 diversity. 

A single-issue group is one that is all of the following EXCEPT
0 focused on narrow interest.
0 unable to compromise.
1 organizes on the national level only.
0 single-mindedly in pursuing its goal.
0 intensely committed to a policy goal. 

Single-issue groups
1 include members with narrow, uncompromising interests.
0 have had little effect on the outcomes of elections.
0 mainly focus on the issue of abortion.
0 are not taken seriously because they lack a large constituency.
0 tend to focus on their specific economic interest rather than on collective social issues. 

Single-issue group politics has been especially emotional over the issue of
0 consumerism.
0 equality.
1 abortion.
0 foreign policy.
0 affirmative action. 

One of the major inducements of the American interest group system is that it
0 provides too much representation.
0 distracts government officials.
1 is biased toward the wealthy.
0 stifles the expression of new interests.
0 is dominated by single-issue groups. 

By 2000, the number of groups listed in the Encyclopedia of Associations was over
0 5,000.
0 1,000.
0 10,000.
1 20,000.
0 50,000. 

Which of the following statements about interest groups is FALSE?
0 The majority of groups now have their headquarters in Washington, D.C.
0 There are an enormous number of highly specialized and seemingly trivial groups.
0 Almost every group has a staff and publications.
1 The growth rate of interest groups has slowed in recent years.
0 Groups are more diverse today than in past decades. 

Technological improvements in communication have caused interest groups to
0 consolidate.
1 sharply increase in number.
0 sharply decline in number.
0 move out of Washington, D.C.
0 form broad coalitions to expand their clout. 

________ is a communication by someone other than a citizen acting on his or her own behalf,directed to a government decision maker, particularly in the legislative and executive branch,with the hope of influencing his or her decision.
0 Electioneering
0 An amicus curiae brief
1 Lobbying
0 Litigation
0 Campaigning 

Three basic strategies employed by interest groups are all of the following EXCEPT
0 lobbying.
1 implementation.
0 electioneering.
0 litigation.
0 going public. 

Which of the following is NOT one of the basic interest group strategies in America?
0 lobbying
1 running candidates for office
0 litigation
0 electioneering
0 implementation 

A   communication by someone other than a citizen acting on his or her own behalf, directed toa governmental decision maker with the hope of influencing his or her decision   is a definitionof
0 campaigning.
1 lobbying.
0 electioneering.
0 litigation.
0 a policy output. 

Which of the following is NOT a way in which a lobbyist can help a member of Congress?
0 obtaining group support for the politician's reelection
1 introducing legislation in Congress
0 providing valuable information on specialized policy areas
0 helping with political strategy
0 assisting with the cost of traveling between their home district and Washington, D.C. 

According to the text, one of the most common function of lobbyists is to
1 provide information and ideas to members of Congress.
0 recruit former officeholders to help with public relations.
0 convert members of Congress to the point of view the lobbyists represent.
0 actually introduce new legislation.
0 raise funds for preferred political candidates. 

The text identifies two types of lobbyists,
1 full-time employees and consultants.
0 policy experts and legal specialists.
0 attorneys and non-attorneys.
0 those based in Washington, D.C., and those based elsewhere.
0   old school   and   modern style   lobbyists. 

Many interest groups involve themselves in ________ to help get those they consider to be theright people into office or to keep them there.
0 lobbying
1 electioneering
0 litigation
0 policymaking
0 recruitment 

Lobbyists provide members of Congress all of the following EXCEPT
0 help with accomplishing their legislative goals.
0 information.
0 campaign strategy and organizational help.
0 ideas and innovations.
1 None of the above; lobbyists provide all of the above to members of Congress. 

According to the text, the least effective activity of lobbyists in Congress is
0 contributing to campaigns.
0 providing information.
0 activating members of Congress to vote on legislation.
1 converting members of Congress to the lobbyists ¹ positions.
0 both A and B 

According to the text, lobbying works best
0 with people who are undecided about a policy.
0 when large amounts of money are involved.
1 on people already committed to the lobbyist's policy position.
0 when the lobbyist uses pressure tactics.
0 when the lobbyist starts crying and pleading. 

Political action committee (PAC) money goes overwhelmingly to
0 Independents.
0 challengers.
1 incumbents.
0 Democrats.
0 Republicans. 

Political Action Committees are primarily a means used by interest groups for
0 lobbying.
1 electioneering.
0 litigation.
0 policymaking.
0 political action. 

Interest groups seeking to exert influence on the electoral process can honestly and openlyfunnel money into the campaign coffers of their supporters through
0 lobbying.
0 electioneering.
1 Political Action Committees.
0 subgovernments.
0 electronic banking. 

Most PAC money goes overwhelmingly to incumbents because incumbents
0 need more money due to the restraints of being in office.
0 have already been   bought off   by interest groups.
0 have already become friends and supporters of lobbyists.
1 are the most likely to be able to return the investment.
0 have the need for large amounts of money to maintain themselves in power. 

Which of the following is NOT true about Political Action Committees?
0 There are far more PACs now than there were in 1974.
1 Most PAC money goes to challengers rather than incumbents.
0 Some PACs contribute to both challenger and incumbent, playing it safe.
0 Only a handful of candidates have completely resisted the lure of PAC money.
0 PACs contribute before and after elections. 


The most successful tactic that civil rights and environmental groups have used to influencepolicy is
1 litigation.
0 electioneering.
0 lobbying.
0 media advertising.
0 protest demonstrations. 

________ are written arguments submitted to the courts in support of one side of a case.
0 Class action lawsuits
0 Litigations
1 Amicus curiae briefs
0 Public interest lobbies
0 Opening arguments 


Literally, amicus curiae means
0 legal opinion.
0 legal argument.
1 friend of the court.
0 curious observer.
0 let the decision stand. 


________ enables a group of similarly situated plaintiffs to combine similar grievances into asingle suit.
0 An amicus curiae brief
0 A public interest suit
0 Olson's Law of Large Groups
1 A class action lawsuit
0 A collective civil suit 

Flight attendants won a(n) ________ against the airline industry's regulation that allstewardesses had to be unmarried.
0 amicus curiae brief
0 writ of habeas corpus
0 bill of attainder
1 class action lawsuit
0 administrative appeal 


In   going public   interest groups
0 extend membership to a broader range of people.
1 use advertising and public relations to enhance their image.
0 bring class action suits against their opponents.
0 issue stock.
0 open their decision-making meetings to the general public. 

Which of the following statements about interest groups going public is FALSE?
0 Interest groups carefully cultivate their public images.
0 Interest groups market not only their stand on issues but their reputations as well.
0 More and more organizations have launched expensive public relations efforts.
1 The public relations of most groups tend to be characterized by hard sell and bias.
0 A and C only 

Which of the following statements is FALSE?
1 In the American economy, government directly determines wages, prices, and profits.
0 Public policy in America has economic effects through regulations, tax advantages, subsidies and contracts, and international trade.
0 Even a minor change in government regulatory policy can cost industries a great deal or bring increased profits.
0 How the tax code is written determines whether people and producers pay a lot or a little of their incomes to the government.
0 B and D only 

Economic groups
0 are those which require individuals to pay dues to be members.
0 consist only of corporations, rather than individuals, as members.
1 are those groups interested in wages, prices, and profits.
0 lobby on behalf of all consumers.
0 are those groups that provide information to Congress. 

Right-to-work laws are most strongly supported by
0 unemployed citizens.
1 business groups.
0 union officials.
0 the feminist and civil rights movements.
0 illegal immigrants. 

The union shop
0 serves as the headquarters of an organized labor group.
0 sells only goods made by laborers affiliated with a union.
1 requires that all employees in a unionized business join the union.
0 is a retail store whose employees are unionized.
0 both B and D 

Right-to-work laws ________ the union shop.
0 take a neutral stance toward
0 require
0 legalize
1 outlaw
0 regulate 


Right-to-work laws
0 guarantee full employment.
1 outlaw union membership as a condition of employment.
0 require employees to join the union representing them.
0 offer government jobs to unemployed workers.
0 require welfare recipients to work for their welfare checks. 

Business PACs
0 have so far been associated only with multinational corporations.
0 are the most visible of Washington lobbies.
1 have increased more dramatically than any other category of PACs.
0 have not been as effective as labor and consumer PACs.
0 contribute more to Democrats than to Republicans. 

Environmental groups
0 are an example of an economic interest group.
1 grew dramatically after the first Earth Day in 1970.
0 support nuclear power as a clean alternative to coal mining.
0 have had very little influence on Congress and state legislatures.
0 tend to avoid energy issues, while concentrating on the preservation of wilderness. 

One of the reasons that   business   does not always get what it wants is
1 business groups often have different interests and want different things.
0 it has limited resources to spend on influencing government policy.
0 it has often used ineffective lobbying techniques.
0 it is a relatively   weak   cluster of interest groups.
0 none of the above 

The first ________ in April 1970 helped to spur on a number of environmental groups.
1 Earth Day
0 smog alert
0 serious oil spill
0 nuclear power plant accident
0 nuclear plant explosion 

Public interest lobbies are those organizations that
0 emphasize equal rights and equality of opportunity in America.
0 eschew the subgovernment system and operate within view of the public, often through town meetings.
0 have large memberships, usually a million or more.
1 seek a collective good, the achievement of which will not selectively and materially benefit members or activists.
0 focus exclusively on public expenditures directed toward Social Security. 

Environmental groups have been most successful at
0 stopping strip mining.
0 halting the trans-Alaskan pipeline.
1 thwarting the expansion of the nuclear power industry.
0 stopping the development of commercial supersonic aircraft.
0 protecting the reefer toad and other endangered species. 

That successful lobbying efforts by consumer groups benefits all consumers, and not justgroup members, is an example of
0 interest group liberalism.
0 electioneering.
0 lobbying.
1 a free-rider problem.
0 Olson's Law of Large Groups. 

Organizations seeking a collective good that may not benefit them directly are called
0 commodity associations.
0 protest groups.
1 public interest lobbies.
0 single-issue groups.
0 altruistic lobbies. 

The ________ is the oldest and largest of the African -American groups which have fought forequality at the polls, in housing, on the job, in education, and in all other facets of Americanlife.
0 Urban League
0 Congress of Racial Equality
1 National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
0 Rainbow Coalition
0 National African-American Organization 



In addition to fighting segregation and discrimination, civil rights interest groups have alsofocused on
1 broader economic problems.
0 the environment.
0 transportation.
0 housing quality.
0 gender equality. 

The ________ movement was spurred by a single person: Ralph Nader.
0 American labor
0 modern civil rights movement
1 consumer
0 anti-Vietnam War
0 gay rights 

Common Cause is an example of
1 a public interest lobby.
0 a subgovernment.
0 interest group liberalism.
0 a single-issue group.
0 a for-profit lobby. 

An example of a public interest group is
1 Common Cause.
0 American Medical Association.
0 National Organization for Women.
0 National Association of Manufacturers.
0 National Rifle Association 

According to Robert Salisbury, the increase in lobbying activity has resulted in
0 greater clout for business and industry groups.
0 less democracy.
1 less clout overall for interest groups.
0 government by minority interests.
0 elitist policymaking. 

The growth of both interest groups and the scope of government over the past several decadesrepresents
0 the former increasing the latter.
0 the latter increasing the former.
1 both A and B
0 the latter decreasing the former.
0 Neither A nor B; there is no relationship between the two. 


Which of the following did the framers of the Constitution conceive of as the center ofpolicymaking in America?
0 the president
0 the people
1 Congress
0 the courts
0 the Supreme Court 

The foremost attraction for the job of serving in Congress is
0 a salary four times the income of the typical American family.
0 generous retirement benefits.
1 the power to make key public policy decisions.
0 travel benefits.
0 employment opportunities after leaving office. 

Which of the following is NOT one of the perquisites which go with the job of being a memberof Congress?
0 a salary of over $150,000
1 subsidized housing in the Virginia or Maryland suburbs of D.C.
0 free use of the mails to communicate with constituents
0 free office space in Washington, D.C., and in the constituency from which elected
0 a budget to support office staff 

________ privileges refer to the free use of the mails enjoyed by Congress.
1 Franking
0 Conmail
0 Junket
0 Procurement
0 E-mail 

The most prominent characteristic of a Congressperson's job is
0 prestige.
1 hard work.
0 high pay.
0 travel.
0 the 30-hour work week. 

A myth about members of Congress is that they
0 generally are educated and come from high-status occupations.
0 tend to develop policy specialties.
0 are especially effective in carrying out their constituent service.
1 are overpaid, underworked, corrupt, and ineffective.
0 are overwhelmingly male. 

The United States House of Representatives has ________ members.
0 638
0 100
1 435
0 80
0 535 

The United States Senate has ________ members.
0 50
1 100
0 435
0 438
0 535 

How many senators are elected from each state?
0 one
1 two
0 four
0 it depends on a state's population
0 the same number as it has electors in the electoral college 

Which of the following is TRUE about the minimum age requirements for members ofCongress set forth in the Constitution?
0 One must be at least 21 years of age to serve in the House of Representatives.
1 One must be at least 30 years of age to serve in the Senate.
0 One must be at least 35 years of age to serve in either the House or the Senate.
0 There are no age requirements for members of Congress.
0 The age requirements are the same for the House and the Senate. 

The members of the Senate closely reflect the nation in terms of
0 race.
0 gender.
0 economic status.
0 prior occupation.
1 none of the above 

The income and occupations of members of Congress
0 typically reflect the pluralistic nature of American society.
0 are very close to the average found among their constituency.
1 would, for the most part, make them members of the elite in American society.
0 have no real impact on public policymaking.
0 places over 90 percent of them in the millionaire businessperson class. 

African Americans constitute ________ of the United States Senate.
1 less than 10 percent
0 approximately 35 percent
0 roughly half
0 well over half
0 about 20 percent 

In terms of religion, most members of Congress are
0 Catholic.
0 Jewish.
1 Protestant.
0 born-again Christians.
0 atheists. 

The most common prior occupation for members of Congress is
0 business.
1 law.
0 education.
0 public service.
0 state legislator. 

Relative to the total population, the most underrepresented group in Congress is
0 African Americans.
0 Hispanics.
1 women.
0 Jews.
0 homosexuals. 

Overall, members of Congress can ________ of the American people.
1 possibly claim substantive representation, but not descriptive representation
0 possibly claim descriptive representation, but not substantive representation
0 claim both substantive and descriptive representation
0 claim neither substantive nor descriptive representation
0 possibly claim both substantive and descriptive representation 

Millionaire Senator Edward Kennedy sponsoring a bill to help the poor and disadvantagedwould be an example of
0 descriptive representation.
1 substantive representation.
0 elite representation.
0 constituent representation.
0 franking privileges. 

Incumbents are those
1 already holding office.
0 running for office for the first time.
0 who have been defeated in an election.
0 retired members of Congress.
0 running for an office. 

In most congressional elections, challengers
0 outspend an incumbent.
0 win.
0 are better known than incumbents.
1 lose.
0 spend roughly as much money as incumbents. 

The single most important advantage to someone trying to get elected to Congress is
1 being an incumbent.
0 having more money to spend on campaigning.
0 being charismatic and photogenic.
0 having a clean record.
0 winning the endorsement of the top leaders of their party. 

Comparison between members of the House and Senate concerning the impact of incumbencyon their reelection chances shows that one of the reasons that senators have a smalleradvantage is because they
0 have become over-specialized as policymakers.
1 are more likely to be held accountable on controversial issues.
0 are less visible.
0 have longer terms that increase the chance of scandal.
0 represent more homogenous constituencies. 

Reasons that incumbent senators have greater competition than incumbent members of theHouse include all of the following EXCEPT
0 an entire state is more diverse than a congressional district, providing more of a base for opposition.
0 senators have less personal contact with their constituencies.
1 voters are less likely to know the issue positions of their senators than their representatives.
0 senators tend to draw more visible challengers.
0 senate challengers are better funded than House challengers. 

Which of these candidates would most likely get elected?
1 a representative running for reelection
0 a senator running for reelection
0 an incumbent representative challenging a senator
0 a challenger
0 an incumbent 

Compared to members of the House, senators are
0 more likely to have personal contact with their constituents.
1 more likely to face difficult reelection opponents.
0 less likely to face difficult reelection opponents.
0 less likely to use television in their reelection campaigns.
0 none of the above 

Studies have shown that presidential ________ in an election have little effect on the success ofthe party's candidates for the House and Senate.
1 coattails
0 junkets
0 vetoes
0 headwinds
0 scandals 

Which of the following is NOT one of the three primary activities that members of Congressengage in to increase the probability of their reelection?
0 advertising
0 credit-claiming
0 position-taking
1 oversight
0 None of the above; oversight is a form of position-taking. 

An example of casework by a member of Congress is
0 writing a newsletter to send out to constituents.
1 helping a constituent gain citizenship.
0 voting for a bill desired by constituents.
0 working with a caucus on a public policy that affects his or her constituents.
0 all of the above 

The pork barrel and casework are examples of
1 opportunities for credit-claiming by members of Congress.
0 advertising techniques.
0 descriptive representation.
0 position-taking.
0 congressional continuity. 

An especially important asset for incumbents running for reelection is their
1 service to constituents.
0 voting records.
0 support by party leaders in Congress.
0 presidential support.
0 invisibility. 

The ________ is the list of federal projects, grants, and contracts available to cities, businesses,colleges, and institutions which members of Congress seek to locate in their district to promotethe interests of their constituency.
0 casework
1 pork barrel
0 frank
0 junket
0 Treasurer's register 

Federal grants and contracts that members of Congress try to obtain for their constituents arecollectively referred to as
1 the pork barrel.
0 casework.
0 public service.
0 perquisites.
0 affirmative action. 

Members of Congress engage in each of the following activities that increase the probability oftheir reelections EXCEPT
0 advertising.
1 party voting.
0 credit-claiming.
0 position taking.
0 spend much of their time away from Congress and in their home districts. 

What accounts for the success of congressional candidates?
0 their highly representative policy positions
0 presidential coattails
0 economic forces
1 advertising, credit-claiming, and position-taking.
0 good looks 

Which of the following is NOT true about incumbents?
0 They usually win elections.
0 They usually have more money than their challengers.
0 They usually have higher name recognition and visibility than their opponents.
1 They usually face very tough challengers, especially in races for the House.
0 They usually have their party's endorsement. 


In the House races of 2004, the typical incumbent outspent the typical challenger by
0 2 to 1.
0 4 to 1.
0 6 to 1.
1 15 to 1.
0 20 to 1. 

Which of the following statements about money in Congressional elections is FALSE?
1 It costs more money to elect a president than to elect a member of Congress.
0 Most of the money spent in congressional elections comes from individuals.
0 About a quarter of the funds raised in general election contests come from PACs.
0 Political Action Committees often make contributions after the election.
0 PACs often switch sides and give money to the candidate they originally opposed. 

The role of party identification in voters ¹ choices in congressional campaigns is
0 extremely important, and increasingly so.
1 moderately important, even though party identification is not as strong as it used to be.
0 slightly important in a few districts, not important in most others.
0 not important at all, and never really has been.
0 much less significant than in presidential campaigns. 

Party loyalty at the voting booth is
0 stronger than it was a generation ago.
0 no longer a good indication of voting behavior.
1 still a good predictor of voting behavior.
0 almost nonexistent today.
0 greater among Democrats than among Republicans. 

House incumbents typically receive
0 about the same amount of contributions from PACs as challengers.
0 less from PACs than challengers.
0 much more from PACs as challengers.
1 generous support from their party campaign committees.
0 none of the above. 

On average, most of the money raised by a candidate for Congress comes from
0 political parties.
1 individual contributions.
0 the candidate's own savings.
0 Political Action Committees.
0 loans. 

A single Political Action Committee
0 has no limit on the amount of money it can spend on a candidate.
1 can at most account for only a small percentage of a winner's total spending.
0 usually puts all its efforts into one candidate.
0 can gain the most influence by giving money to candidates who disagree with them.
0 can make or break a candidate in a particularly close congressional election. 

When Political Action Committees contribute money to members of Congress they are usuallyseeking
1 access to policymakers.
0 votes on specific legislation.
0 to install a preferred challenger in office.
0 to create a more pluralistic Congress.
0 to literally buy opposing legislators ¹ votes. 

Which of the following statements about the role of money in congressional elections isFALSE?
0 Outspending your opponent by a large margin is no guarantee of success.
0 The more challengers spend, the more votes they receive.
1 Challengers usually outspend incumbents.
0 In open seats, the candidate who spends the most usually wins.
0 Incumbents benefit less from campaign spending than challengers. 

All of the following may increase the likelihood that an incumbent is defeated EXCEPT
0 national political   tidal waves.  
0 redistricting.
1 campaign funding.
0 scandals.
0 a strong challenger. 

After each federal census,
0 the office of the Speaker of the House changes hands.
0 the size of Congress increases.
1 the membership of the House is reapportioned
0 the Senate reapportions its membership.
0 all of the above 

Occasionally, a major political tidal wave rolls across the country and throws large numbers ofincumbents of a given party out of office. When did this last occur?
1 1994
0 1980
0 1974
0 1964
0 1954 

Which of the following statements about Congress is FALSE?
0 Congress is a collection of generalists trying to make policy on specialized topics.
0 Members of Congress are surrounded by people who know (or claim to know) more than they do.
0 Members of Congress are often unsure of what is being voted on when a roll-call vote is called.
0 Members frequently ask their colleagues how to vote.
1 none of the above 

Nebraska's legislature is the only one in the United States that is NOT
0 elected by the voters.
0 unicameral.
1 bicameral.
0 tricameral.
0 under term limits. 

Bicameralism means that a legislative body is one
1 with two houses, providing checks and balances on policymaking.
0 in which each state has two senators, providing equal representation of the states.
0 in which incumbents have a better chance of being reelected, providing continuity in policymaking.
0 that must share power with a president, providing more efficient policymaking.
0 in which there are only two political parties. 

To be sent to the president, a bill must be passed by
0 the House.
0 the Senate.
0 either the House or the Senate.
1 both the House and the Senate.
0 a majority vote of Congress, regardless of which house the votes come from. 

The House ________ Committee reviews most bills coming from other committees before theygo on to the full House, thus performing a traffic cop function.
0 Appropriations
0 Ways and Means
1 Rules
0 Authorization
0 Review 

Articles of impeachment must be passed by
0 either the House or the Senate.
0 both the House and the Senate.
0 the Senate.
1 the House.
0 the Supreme Court. 

House seats are up for election every
1 two years.
0 four years.
0 six years.
0 eight years.
0 five years. 

A Senate seat is up for election every
0 two years.
0 four years.
1 six years.
0 eight years.
0 five years. 

Which of the following is TRUE about the Senate as compared to the House?
0 more centralized with stronger leadership
0 seniority more important in determining power
0 more influential on the budget
1 more influential in foreign affairs
0 smaller in number, less powerful and less prestigious 

According to the Constitution, revenue bills must originate in the
0 Internal Revenue Service.
0 Federal Reserve System.
1 House.
0 Senate.
0 Treasury Department. 

Nominees to the United States Supreme Court must be confirmed by
1 the Senate.
0 the House.
0 either the House or the Senate.
0 both the House and the Senate.
0 the president. 

According to the Constitution, once impeached, federal officials are then tried in the
0 Supreme Court.
0 House.
1 Senate.
0 Department of Justice.
0 United States District Court for the District of Columbia. 

The House Rules Committee
0 has its members appointed by the House majority leader.
0 is similar to the Senate Rules Committee.
0 usually retains independence from the House leadership.
1 reviews most bills coming from committee before they go to the full House.
0 all of the above 

The Constitution gives the House of Representatives the power to
1 initiate all revenue bills.
0 ratify all treaties.
0 confirm presidential nominations.
0 try impeached officials.
0 all of the above 

One of the key differences between the House and Senate is that the House
0 has weaker leadership.
0 is more influential on foreign affairs.
1 has more policy specialization.
0 is less centralized.
0 is less institutionalized. 

One of the key differences between the House and Senate is that the Senate
0 is more centralized.
1 is less dependent on seniority for determining power.
0 has a lower turnover rate.
0 has stronger leadership.
0 has more anarchy. 

The real differences between the House and the Senate lie in their
0 ideology.
0 members ¹ characteristics.
1 organization and centralization of power.
0 role in policy.
0 power relative to each other. 

The filibuster
1 is unique to the Senate.
0 is unique to the House.
0 is allowed in both the House and the Senate.
0 has been ruled unconstitutional.
0 has been prohibited in both the House and Senate. 

________ members present and voting can halt a filibuster by voting for cloture.
1 Sixty
0 Seventy
0 Eighty
0 Fifty-one
0 Seventy-five 

The filibuster is a technique used in the
0 House to delay legislation until a full House can convene.
1 Senate to prolong debate in order to kill a bill.
0 Senate to bypass committees in voting on controversial issues.
0 House to allow more time to debate controversial policies.
0 House and Senate to prevent a vote on a bill. 

To cut off debate and end a filibuster is known as
0 franking.
0 coattails.
1 cloture.
0 overriding.
0 hushing. 

To end a filibuster requires ________ members present and voting to cut off debate.
0 50
1 60
0 75
0 99
0 218 

Which of the following congressional offices is mandated by the Constitution?
1 Speaker of the House
0 House and Senate Majority Leader
0 President of the House
0 President of the United States
0 all of the above 

Which of the following does the Speaker NOT play a role in?
0 making committee assignments
0 presiding over the House when it is in session
1 recommending which members should be expelled from the House for failure to support the party's positions on bills
0 assigning most bills to committees
0 appointing the party's legislative leaders 

The ________ is next in line after the vice president to succeed a president who resigns, dies inoffice, or is impeached.
0 Senate majority leader
0 Senate minority leader
0 House majority leader
1 Speaker of the House
0 Chair of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 

The minority whip
0 assists the majority leader in party-line votes.
0 becomes the Speaker automatically if the Speaker resigns.
0 represents African Americans, Hispanic Americans, and Asian Americans in each chamber of Congress.
1 keeps a close head count on key votes, and attempts to keep party members in line.
0 is used to punish members who do not vote with the rest of their party. 

Which of the following statements about the majority leader of the House of Representatives isFALSE?
1 The majority leader exercises substantial control over which bills get assigned to which committees.
0 The majority leader is the main steppingstone to the job of Speaker of the House.
0 The majority leader is responsible for scheduling bills in the House.
0 The majority leader is responsible for rounding up votes on behalf of the party's position on legislation.
0 He or she is the principal ally of the Speaker. 

The ________ has the job of presiding over the Senate, breaking ties when necessary.
0 majority leader
0 majority whip
0 minority leader
1 vice president
0 Speaker 

The most powerful person in the Senate is the
1 majority leader.
0 vice president of the United States, who serves as president of the Senate.
0 chair of the Rules Committee.
0 Speaker.
0 president of the United States. 

Most important congressional activity is done
0 on legislators ¹ visits to their home districts.
1 in meetings of standing committees and their subcommittees.
0 on the House floor.
0 on the Senate floor.
0 in the White House. 

Most of the business of Congress takes place
0 in congressional districts.
0 on the floor of the House and Senate.
1 in committees and subcommittees.
0 during evening social functions.
0 in the Rules committees. 

A ________ committee is one appointed for a limited, specific purpose, such as that set up toinvestigate the Watergate scandal.
0 standing
1 select
0 conference
0 joint
0 special 

Appropriations, Judiciary, and Armed Forces are all examples of ________ committees.
1 standing
0 select
0 conference
0 joint
0 rule 

When the House and the Senate pass different versions of the same bill
0 the House bill is changed to conform with the Senate bill.
0 the Senate bill is changed to conform with the House bill.
1 a conference committee is appointed to resolve differences.
0 a joint committee is appointed to resolve differences.
0 the president may select which bill to enact into law. 

Legislative ________ is the process of monitoring the bureaucracy and its administration ofpolicy.
0 franking
0 stonewalling
0 overview
1 oversight
0 supremacy 

When members of Congress hold a hearing to question a cabinet member on how a law isbeing carried out, they are engaging in
0 agenda-setting.
0 filibustering.
1 legislative oversight.
0 casework.
0 congressional administration. 

Which of the following statements about congressional committees is FALSE?
0 Unless a committee gives a bill a favorable report it almost never can be considered by the full House or Senate.
0 The most important output of the committee is the marked up bill.
0 Members of the committee usually serve as floor managers of the bill.
0 Members of the committee act as cue-givers to whom other members turn for advice.
1 none of the above 

The seniority system gave a decisive edge to House members from ________ districts.
0 Republican
0 suburban
0 older
1 safe
0 competitive 


Members of Congress seek committees that will help them achieve each of the following goalsEXCEPT
0 reelection.
0 influence in Congress.
1 a salary increase.
0 opportunity to make policy in areas they think are important.
0 opportunity to make policy in areas important to their constituents. 

Traditionally, Congressional committee chairpersons have been chosen through
1 the seniority system.
0 party rank.
0 popularity with majority leaders.
0 a majority vote by committee members.
0 the merit system. 


Caucuses in Congress
0 press committees to hold hearings.
0 push their preferred legislation.
0 mobilize votes for favored legislation.
1 all of the above
0 none of the above 

Congressional reforms of the 1970s
0 professionalized the operation of Congress and made it much more efficient.
1 decentralized power and democratized Congress.
0 were aimed at rooting out scandal and corruption.
0 ended the two-party monopoly of Congress and brought new parties into Congress.
0 all of the above 

Republican congressional reforms in the 1990s included all of the following EXCEPT
0 committee chairs were allowed to choose the chairs of subcommittees on their committees.
0 both committee and subcommittee chairs were limited to three consecutive two -year terms as chair.
0 some subcommittees were eliminated.
1 committee chairs were given complete control over the timing of bills under consideration.
0 none of the above 

Which of the following is responsible for responding to congressional requests for informationand providing non-partisan studies?
1 Congressional Research Service
0 Congressional Budget Office
0 General Accounting Office
0 Ways and Means Committee
0 Office of the Majority Leader 

Committee staff is responsible for all of the following EXCEPT
1 providing services to constituents.
0 organizing hearings.
0 writing legislation.
0 monitoring the executive branch.
0 coordinating with congressional offices. 

Which of the following offices is responsible for making economic projections about theperformance of the economy, the costs of proposed policies, and the economic effects of taxingand spending alternatives?
0 Congressional Research Service
1 Congressional Budget Office
0 General Accounting Office
0 Ways and Means Committee
0 Federal Reserve 

Only ________ can formally submit a bill for congressional consideration.
0 members of the House
0 senators
1 members of the House or senators
0 the president
0 the Speaker of the House 

Most bills formally submitted for consideration in Congress
0 are passed and signed into law.
0 are passed, but vetoed by the president.
0 are defeated in close final votes on the floors of one chamber.
1 are quietly killed off early in the process.
0 pass one house, but are killed in the other house. 

Basically, Congress is a(n) ________ decision -making body.
1 reactive and cumbersome
0 active and smooth
0 unified and consistent
0 radical and hasty
0 retroactive 

The president's most common method of attempting to influence Congress is to
0 call up wavering members.
0 offer to campaign for members.
1 hold regular meetings with the party's leaders in Congress.
0 invite members of Congress to the White House.
0 use the veto power. 

Presidential leadership of Congress in promoting the chief executive's programs is
0 dominant, with a heavy hand usually convincing wavering members.
0 a smooth, generally successful enterprise.
1 at the margins, as a facilitator.
0 nonexistent.
0 proactive, substantive, and adversarial. 

The parties in Congress are most cohesive
0 on foreign policy issues.
1 when electing their official leaders.
0 on economic policy.
0 military matters.
0 during floor votes. 

The English politician and philosopher Edmund Burke favored the concept of legislators as________, using their best judgment to make policy in the interests of the people.
0 constituent robots
1 trustees
0 instructed delegates
0 politicos
0 judges 

Some prefer the concept of legislators as ________, mirroring the preferences of theirconstituents.
0 trustees
0 politicos
1 instructed delegates
0 uninstructed delegates
0 pollsters 

The best way constituents can influence congressional voting on legislation is to
0 sign petitions.
0 write letters or send telegrams.
0 fax or call in their opinions.
1 elect a representative or senator who agrees with their views.
0 demonstrate on the steps of the capitol. 

On a typical issue, the primary determinant of a congressional member's vote is
0 constituent preferences as indicated by extensive polling.
0 the position of the president.
1 personal ideology.
0 the toss of a coin.
0 the position of their party leaders. 

Legislators who use their best judgment to make policy in the interests of the people are called
1 trustees.
0 instructed delegates.
0 politicos.
0 attentive leaders.
0 opinion leaders. 

Most members of Congress would be considered
0 trustees.
0 instructed delegates.
1 politicos.
0 ambassadors.
0 attentive leaders. 

Constituencies influence policy mostly by
1 the initial choice of the representative.
0 influencing congressional leaders.
0 empowering the president in his negotiations with Congress.
0 buying votes through election contributions.
0 lobbying Senators. 


In the relationship between lobbyists and members of Congress,
1 members of Congress can ignore and embarrass lobbyists.
0 lobbyists hold the greater power.
0 members of Congress depend on lobbyists for reelection.
0 lobbyists pay members of Congress to pass or defeat bills.
0 lobbyists spend most of their efforts on converting opponents to their cause. 

If Congress has increased the scope of government it is because
0 members typically suffer from Potomac fever.
0 members are by-spending liberals.
1 that is what constituencies want.
0 that is what Congressional staffers want.
0 it is responding to the policy expertise provided by the bureaucracy. 


The principal reason that presidents have trouble getting things done is that
0 most are weak and indecisive and do not try to do much.
0 they are often upstaged or undermined by their own vice presidents.
1 other policymakers with whom they deal have their own agendas, interests, and sources of power.
0 they are frequently overruled by the Supreme Court.
0 the presidency is mostly a ceremonial job and the president is not expected to do much. 

As Richard Neustadt has argued, presidential power is probably best understood as the powerto
1 persuade.
0 command.
0 control.
0 harass.
0 veto. 

Richard Neustadt has argued that presidential power is the power to
0 instruct.
0 command.
0 educate.
0 control.
1 persuade. 

Americans want a strong president,
1 but do not like a concentration of power.
0 and do not care whether the strength is used for good or for ill.
0 and would like to abolish all checks on presidential power.
0 but do not expect much from any president.
0 but want an even stronger Congress. 


According to the Constitution, a president must be at least ________ years of age.
1 35
0 30
0 40
0 25
0 21 

All presidents but one have been
1 Protestant.
0 Catholic.
0 Hare Krishna.
0 atheist.
0 Evangelical Christian. 

According to the original Constitution, the president must be
1 at least 35 years old.
0 a resident of the United States for at least five years.
0 a citizen of the United States for at least ten years.
0 a white man.
0 all of the above except D 

How many presidents were political scientists?
0 about half of them
1 one
0 all but one of them
0 two
0 all of them 

Which president was a political scientist?
0 Ronald Reagan
0 James Madison
0 Richard Nixon
0 Bill Clinton
1 Woodrow Wilson 

________ was widely regarded to be the worst and most ineffective president.
1 Warren Harding
0 Richard Nixon
0 Ronald Reagan
0 Bill Clinton
0 Andrew Johnson 

Since World War II, United States presidents have
0 except for Bill Clinton, first served as vice president.
0 had very similar career backgrounds.
0 all previously served as governors.
1 come from a diversity of career experiences.
0 all served as United States senators. 

The Twenty-second Amendment, passed in 1951,
0 provided for the presidential and vice presidential candidates to run as a team.
0 gave impeachment powers to Congress.
1 limited presidents to two terms of office.
0 provided for the direct election of the president by the people.
0 granted 18-year-olds the right to vote. 

The two-term limit was placed on the presidency by
0 an act of Congress passed after Franklin D. Roosevelt's death.
1 the Twenty-second Amendment.
0 the Presidential Powers Act of 1951.
0 the Twenty-fifth Amendment.
0 Article II of the original Constitution. 

________ took over as president upon the death of Franklin Roosevelt in 1945, and eventuallyordered the dropping of the atomic bombs on Japanese cities.
0 Theodore Roosevelt
0 Dwight Eisenhower
1 Harry Truman
0 Lyndon Johnson
0 John F. Kennedy 

As president, ________ launched the   Great Society   at home while escalating the VietnamWar abroad.
1 Lyndon Johnson
0 Harry Truman
0 Richard Nixon
0 Gerald Ford
0 Dwight Eisenhower 

Appointed to the vice presidency in 1973 due to a vacancy, he was the only one to becomepresident having run for neither the presidency or vice presidency in the preceding election.
0 Lyndon Johnson
0 Nelson Rockefeller
0 Ronald Reagan
1 Gerald Ford
0 Jimmy Carter 

Which of the following presidents was a Republican?
0 Harry Truman
0 John Kennedy
0 Lyndon Johnson
0 Jimmy Carter
1 Richard Nixon 

The only president to resign his office was
0 Warren Harding.
0 Jimmy Carter.
0 Lyndon Johnson.
0 Spiro Agnew.
1 Richard Nixon. 

Which of the following statements is FALSE?
0 For over 10 percent of American history, the presidency has been occupied by an individual not elected to the office.
0 In the twentieth century, almost one-third of our presidents were   accidental Presidents.  
0 About one in five presidents got the job because they were vice president when the incumbent president died or resigned.
1 Most presidents have served two or more full terms.
0 Most presidential elections are decided by Congress. 

Prior to his election as president, ________ had been a well -known actor and served for twoterms as governor of California.
0 George Bush
1 Ronald Reagan
0 Jimmy Carter
0 Richard Nixon
0 Earl Warren 

Impeachment is roughly the political equivalent of a(n)
0 exoneration.
0 admission of guilt.
1 indictment in criminal law.
0 guilty verdict.
0 firing. 

In order to impeach a president, it takes
0 a unanimous vote of the Supreme Court.
0 a two-thirds vote in the Senate.
1 a majority vote in the House of Representatives.
0 a two-thirds vote in the House of Representatives.
0 a majority vote in the Senate. 

Impeachment of a president means that the president is
0 convicted of a crime.
1 indicted by the House.
0 removed from office.
0 tried by the Senate.
0 all of the above 

In order to convict and remove an impeached president, it takes
1 a two-thirds vote in the Senate.
0 a majority vote in the Senate.
0 a majority vote in the House of Representatives.
0 a two-thirds vote in the House of Representatives.
0 both B and D 

Once the House votes for impeachment, the president
0 must leave office.
0 is fined or sentenced to prison.
0 is tried by the Supreme Court.
1 is tried by the Senate.
0 must be indicted by a Grand Jury before being removed from office. 

The scandal surrounding Richard Nixon's administration that led to impeachment hearingswas known as
0 Iran-Contra.
0 the Camp David Affair.
1 Watergate.
0 Checkers.
0 Teapot Dome. 


The Twenty-fifth Amendment, ratified in 1967,
1 created a means for selecting a new vice president when the office became vacant.
0 granted 18-year-olds the right to vote.
0 limited the president to two terms in office.
0 specifically forced Richard Nixon from office.
0 provided for the direct election of the president by the people. 



The Constitution framers
0 were unanimous in wanting a single president to lead the country.
0 were united in wanting a strong chief executive.
0 were united in wanting a chief executive similar to the prime minister of Great Britain.
1 generally wanted a president with limited authority and responsibilities.
0 hoped to create a monarchy in the United States. 

The president's power can best be understood as
0 very limited and largely ceremonial.
0 always the dominant figure in the American political system.
1 shared with other branches of government as part of the Madisonian system of checks and balances.
0 unlimited and absolute.
0 originally intended to be unlimited and absolute, but gradually weakened over time. 

The Constitution
0 provides a list of specific powers and implied powers reserved for the president.
0 places the power of the presidency above the other branches of government.
0 requires Congress to delegate specific areas of presidential power.
1 says remarkably little about presidential power.
0 B, C, and D are all correct. 

In order to preserve the balance of power in government without jeopardizing theindependence of the presidency, the framers
0 refused to give the president powers in the area of national security.
0 created a weak executive.
1 checked those powers that they believed to be most dangerous.
0 limited the president to administrative powers.
0 limited presidents to two terms of office so they could not become   elected monarchs.   

Which of the following is NOT a constitutional power of the president?
0 serve as Commander in Chief of the armed forces
0 sign or veto legislation passed by Congress
0 appoint federal judges with the advice and consent of a majority of the Senate
1 enact legislation by issuing decrees
0 All of these are the president's constitutional powers. 

The president has the constitutional authority to make treaties with other nations, subject tothe agreement of
0 a majority of both the House and the Senate.
0 a majority of the Senate.
1 two-thirds of the Senate.
0 two-thirds of the House.
0 a majority of the House. 

The founding fathers envisioned a presidency that would
0 be better organized than today's presidency.
1 have fewer responsibilities than today's presidency.
0 have greater control over the Congress than today's presidency.
0 have greater powers than today's presidency.
0 clearly be the dominant branch of government. 

Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson
0 were the first presidents to exercise power beyond the specific powers granted to the president in the Constitution.
0 developed the role of the president as manager of the economy.
1 set a precedent for presidents to serve as world leaders.
0 were the only two presidents to ever have their actions declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court.
0 were among the least effective presidents. 

A primary resource available to presidents for controlling the bureaucracy is
0 control of the federal budget.
0 their unlimited power to offer patronage positions in the bureaucracy.
1 the power to appoint top-level administrators.
0 their ability to dismiss or fire most members of the bureaucracy.
0 all of the above 

In recent years,
0 presidents have been less concerned about their appointment power.
1 presidents have paid closer attention to appointing officials who will be responsive to the president's policies.
0 presidents have paid less attention to agency rules and regulations.
0 there has been a trend toward decentralized decision making in the White House.
0 there has been a trend toward centralized decision making in the White House. 

A constitutional duty of the vice president is to
1 preside over the Senate and cast the deciding vote in the event of a tie.
0 attend the funerals of foreign leaders on behalf of the president.
0 preside over the House and cast the deciding vote in the event of a tie.
0 raise funds for party candidates.
0 all of the above 

Traditionally, a vice president
0 has no formal constitutional powers.
0 later becomes president.
0 is an important advisor to the president.
1 has little responsibility.
0 both C and D 

The president's cabinet
0 was provided for and elaborated upon by the Constitution.
0 has changed very little since 1960.
0 tends to serve as a collective board of directors.
1 consists of executive branch leaders who advise the president on policy and administer government departments.
0 all of the above 

The presidential cabinet
0 is the electronically locked vault where the president keeps his top secret papers.
0 is given tremendous power under the Constitution.
0 includes, by law, a minimum of two sitting members of Congress at all times.
1 consists of the head of each executive department, plus any additional government officials the president designates.
0 can veto actions by the president. 

Which of the following is a member of the cabinet?
0 director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
0 Speaker of the House
0 secretary of the navy
0 White House Chief of Staff
1 none of the above 

Cabinet-level executive departments are created by
1 Congress.
0 the Constitution.
0 the president.
0 rarely held national referendums.
0 all of the above 

The head of each cabinet-level executive department is appointed by the president and
0 must be confirmed by a majority of the House.
0 is not subject to House or Senate approval.
1 must be confirmed by a majority of the Senate.
0 must be confirmed by a majority of both the House and the Senate.
0 must be confirmed by two-thirds of the Senate. 

The cabinet department responsible for making foreign policy and handling treatynegotiations is
0 interior.
0 justice.
0 foreign affairs.
0 defense.
1 state. 

The two oldest cabinet departments are
0 state and defense.
0 interior and justice.
0 treasury and justice.
1 state and treasury.
0 education and state. 

The newest cabinet department is
0 commerce.
0 agriculture.
0 interior.
1 homeland security.
0 transportation. 

The National Security Council
1 links the president's key foreign and military policy advisors.
0 is composed of the heads of the three branches of the armed services and makes recommendations to the president on combat strategy.
0 was established by President Roosevelt to manage foreign and domestic intelligence operations.
0 was created by legislation to keep the president informed on foreign affairs.
0 helps the president make policy on such matters as inflation and unemployment. 

The Office of Management and Budget is comprised of
1 political appointees and career officials.
0 political appointees, career officials, and congressional staffers.
0 all political appointees.
0 all career officials.
0 economists. 

The Office of Management and Budget, the National Security Council, and the Council ofEconomic Advisors are
0 members of the White House staff.
0 advisory bodies of the Department of State.
1 policymaking bodies of the Executive Office of the President.
0 part of the president's cabinet.
0 the key liaison agencies between the president and Congress. 

The budgetary implications of the president's budget are provided to the president by
0 Executive Budget Office.
0 Department of the Treasury.
0 Council of Economic Advisors.
0 Internal Revenue Service.
1 Office of Management and Budget. 

The agency that reviews legislative proposals for the president is the
0 Council of Economic Advisors.
0 National Security Council.
1 Office of Management and Budget.
0 Legislative Executive Agency.
0 Executive Legislative Agency. 

The part of the executive branch of government that the president sees daily and relies heavilyon for information, policy options, and analysis is the
0 vice president.
0 president's cabinet.
1 White House staff.
0 Executive Office of the President.
0 Council of Economic Advisors. 

The system of White House management employed by President John Kennedy was
0 to disperse his authority to numerous aides, each of who had powerful decision-making power.
0 unusually closed, with only the president and his two closest aides involved in most major decisions.
0 to personally take charge of even the minor details of decision making.
0 a chain of command with a chief of staff who controlled almost all access to the president.
1 such that many aides equally participated in the decision-making process. 

John F. Kennedy's   wheel-and-spokes   system of management was characterized by
0 a hierarchical organization with a chief of staff at the top.
1 many aides with equal status balanced against one another in the decision -making process.
0 the president's involvement in every administrative detail.
0 a closed, small network of computers that directly linked the president to his closest advisors through e-mail messages.
0 a streamlined, fast-paced, and efficient decision-making style. 

The organization and importance of the White House staff depend on
0 the president's Chief of Staff.
0 agenda schedules and formal rules of debate.
1 the personal style of the president in office.
0 the legal authority granted it by Congress.
0 a hierarchy of access to the president. 


The president who was known as the   consummate delegator   because he dispersed authorityto his advisors was
0 John F. Kennedy.
0 George Bush.
1 Ronald Reagan.
0 Jimmy Carter.
0 Lyndon Johnson. 

George W. Bush's management style is
0 wheel and spokes.
0 chaotic.
0 hierarchical.
0 transitional.
1 to delegate. 


The pocket veto can only be used
0 when a new president is about to take office.
0 during a presidential election year.
0 when Congress is in session.
0 on appropriations bills.
1 when Congress is adjourned. 

The Constitution gives the president the power to influence the legislative process through hisresponsibility to
0 make laws by decree without the consent of Congress in some situations.
0 direct the business of Congress and initiate impeachment.
1 report on the state of the union and veto acts of Congress.
0 recommend legislation and make appointments.
0 manage the economy, lead the party, and deal with national crises. 

When a president vetoes congressional legislation,
0 Congress must form a joint committee to address the president's complaints.
0 the Supreme Court determines whether the law will take effect.
1 Congress can override the veto by a two-thirds vote in both houses.
0 there is nothing Congress can do about it.
0 one house of Congress can override the veto if it votes to do so with a two -thirds vote. 

A pocket veto is the situation in which the president
0 vetoes particular items in a spending bill.
1 lets a bill die by neither signing nor vetoing it after Congress has adjourned.
0 rejects a Congressional override.
0 lets a bill become law by neither vetoing nor signing it.
0 sends a law back to Congress with the reasons for rejecting it. 

Which of the following statements about the presidential veto is FALSE?
1 Almost half of all vetoed bills have been overridden by Congress.
0 Presidents can not veto only parts of a bill.
0 Even the threat of a presidential veto can be an effective tool for persuading Congress to give more weight to presidents ¹ views.
0 The presidential veto is an inherently negative resource.
0 The president, unlike most governors, cannot use a line-item veto. 

In 1998, the Supreme Court ruled in Clinton v. City of New York that
1 a 1996 law granting the president the authority to propose rescinding funds in appropriation bills was unconstitutional.
0 the pocket veto was unconstitutional.
0 that the Clinton impeachment vote was unconstitutional.
0 that the president could not line-item veto grant monies to urban areas.
0 none of the above 

In 1996, Congress passed a law giving the president the authority to propose rescinding fundsin appropriations bills. Later,
0 Congress overturned the law.
0 President Clinton chose not to use such authority.
0 President Clinton used it successfully.
1 the Supreme Court voided the decision.
0 President Bush voided the decision. 

The primary obstacle to party unity in Congress is the
0 multiplicity of parties represented.
0 lack of presidential leadership.
0 separation of powers.
0 bicameral legislature.
1 lack of consensus on policy issues among party members. 

When constituency opinion and the president's proposals conflict, members of Congress aremore likely to
0 vote with the president.
1 vote with their constituents.
0 seek an electronic vote rather than a voice vote.
0 not vote.
0 vote according to their own ideology. 

Presidential coattails refers to
0 presidential favors to those who support the president's policies.
0 the formal constitutional powers of the president.
0 the ability of members of Congress to hide behind the president on tough issues.
1 voters casting their ballots for congressional candidates of the president's party who will support the president.
0 withholding of presidential favors from those who oppose the president's policies. 

Presidential coattails refers to
1 voters who support the president casting their ballots for congressional candidates of the president's party.
0 the tendency for the president's party to lose congressional seats in midterm elections.
0 fund-raising parties the president hosts to raise money for congressional candidates.
0 the president's power to appoint members of his own political party to cabinet posts and as personal advisors.
0 members of Congress voting according to the wishes of the president. 

Recent election studies show
0 the president's party usually gains seats in Congress in mid-term elections.
1 a diminishing connection between voters ¹ presidential and congressional voting.
0 that the party of the winning presidential candidate has been gaining an increasing number of seats in congress.
0 that presidential coattails no longer exist.
0 that many congressional races are determined by presidential coattails. 

A mid-term election is
0 one in which the incumbent is running for reelection.
1 a congressional election that is not accompanied by a presidential election.
0 held every two years.
0 a special election that may remove an official from office in the middle of the term.
0 a presidential election that occurs during a session of Congress. 

In mid-term elections, the
0 president's coattails are the strongest.
0 president's party typically gains seats.
0 president almost always wins reelection; a president who does not is the exception.
0 president usually does not become involved.
1 president's party typically loses seats. 

Most studies show that
0 presidential coattails are increasing in certain regions.
1 presidential coattails rarely affect elections.
0 presidential coattails are stronger in midterm elections.
0 presidential coattails are stronger than ever.
0 presidential coattails affect Republicans more than Democrats. 

The impact of public approval or disapproval of the president on the support that thepresident receives in Congress is
0 irrelevant.
0 not too important, though it occasionally has a minor effect.
0 represented in the text by the equation s \ ¹3D px\ ¹2D1.
0 extremely important, and sways nearly all members of Congress on every vote.
1 important, but usually at the margins on most policies. 

The political resource that has the most potential to turn a situation of stalemate between thepresident and Congress into one supportive of the president's legislative proposals is
0 presidential leadership.
0 the president's party leadership.
0 presidential rewards and sanctions.
1 public approval.
0 the threat of veto. 


An electoral mandate ________ the president's level of support in Congress.
0 does severe harm to
1 usually has a positive effect on
0 increases by a factor of 2.5
0 has no effect on
0 guarantees a sharp increase in 

Electoral mandates
0 are the procedures used by the electoral college to tally the presidential electoral votes.
0 occur most often in mid-term elections.
1 consist of the perception that the voters strongly support the winner's positions.
0 are the constitutional requirements that federal elections be held on the second Tuesday of November of even numbered years.
0 have no real effect on how Congress supports the president. 

Which of the following statements about presidential bargaining is FALSE?
0 The presidential bargaining takes a variety of forms.
0 The president needs to bargain only with enough people to provide a majority.
1 Bargaining in the form of providing specific benefits for members of Congress is critical to creating presidential coalitions.
0 The president does not have to bargain with every member of Congress to receive support.
0 Presidents ¹ bargaining ability is enhanced by strong public approval. 

According to the text, two strategies used successfully by President Reagan in achieving hisobjectives were
0 moving slowly and letting Congress set the priorities.
0 moving slowly and setting priorities.
0 lying and forgetting.
1 moving fast and setting priorities.
0 moving fast and letting Congress set the priorities. 

The primary goal of the president's legislative strategy is usually
0 to win on all final votes.
1 to set the agenda.
0 to win the support of all fellow partisans.
0 block legislation he opposes.
0 none of the above 

The president's role in the legislative process
1 is especially important in influencing Congress's agenda.
0 usually puts her/him in conflict with Congress.
0 is usually minor because Congress operates independently from the president.
0 is most effective in domestic policy.
0 at least until 1995, has been to react to and modify congressional initiatives. 


The president's legislative skills compete with other factors influencing congressional voting,including all of the following EXCEPT
0 ideology.
0 constituency news.
1 PAC spending.
0 partisanship.
0 none of the above 

Among the president's constitutional powers as a maker of foreign policy is the power to
0 ratify peace treaties.
0 appropriate foreign-aid funds.
1 extend diplomatic recognition to foreign governments.
0 declare war.
0 all of the above 

Which of the following is NOT one of the president's powers as the nation's chief diplomat?
0 negotiating executive agreements which do not require congressional approval
0 mediating disputes between nations other than the United States
1 declaring war against an adversary
0 extending diplomatic recognition to a nation
0 negotiating treaties with other nations 

Which of the following statements about the role of the president as chief diplomat is FALSE?
0 Presidential diplomacy can involve negotiating conflicts between other nations and not the United States.
1 Senate approval of treaties negotiated by the president is almost automatic.
0 The president has the sole power to negotiate treaties with other nations.
0 In domestic policymaking, as chief diplomat, the president must rely principally on persuasion to lead.
0 All of these are false. 

Some believe the War Powers Resolution could be successfully overturned by the SupremeCourt because it
0 was vetoed by President Nixon.
0 was not ratified within the constitutionally mandated seven -year period.
1 uses a legislative veto, which may violate the separation of powers.
0 interferes with the president's power to declare war.
0 was really aimed at the Vietnam War only. 


The War Powers Resolution may be considered unconstitutional because
1 its use of the legislative veto may be considered a violation of the doctrine of separation of powers.
0 it violates the president's power to declare war.
0 it violates the presidents power as Commander in Chief.
0 it was struck down by the Supreme Court.
0 it violates the congressional power to appropriate funds for the military. 

During the 1991 Gulf War,
0 the War Powers Resolution was ignored.
0 Congress cut off funding after sixty days.
0 President Bush did not seek congressional support for the operation.
1 Congress passed a resolution authorizing the president to use force against Iraq.
0 Congress adopted a formal declaration of war against Iraq. 



Congress's role in national security policy has typically included all of the following EXCEPT
0 support or criticism of the president.
1 initiation of policy.
0 oversight of the executive branch.
0 to pass authorizations and appropriations for presidential actions.
0 monitoring constituent opinions on national security. 

The typical member of Congress supports the president on national security roll-call votes
0 very rarely.
0 about 75 percent of the time.
0 almost always.
0 only 38 percent of the time.
1 slightly more than half the time. 

References by commentators on the presidency to there being   two presidencies   refer to
0 the president as candidate and the president as elected leader.
0 the first term and the second term of a president.
0 what the president originally proposes to accomplish and what the president actually does accomplish.
0 the differences between public and private presidential actions.
1 national security and domestic policy. 

Which of the following statements about presidents going public is FALSE?
0 Presidents are not passive followers of public opinion.
0 Presidents ¹ appearances are often staged purely to obtain the public's attention.
0 In recent years, presidents have averaged more than one public appearance every weekday of the year.
1 Dwight Eisenhower was the first president to use presidential speeches to gain policy support.
0 John F. Kennedy was the first   television president.   

How did the White House Communications Office choreograph George W. Bush's addressfrom the Abraham Lincoln announcing the end of major combat operations in Iraq?
0 They placed a   Mission Accomplished   banner over the president's head.
0 They positioned the Abraham Lincoln so that the shoreline was not visible.
0 They timed the even so that the sun would cast a favorable light on the president.
0 The coordinated the shirts of the crewmembers.
1 all of the above 

The higher the president stands in the polls,
0 the less support he needs in Congress.
0 the shorter the president's coattails.
0 the less need there is for presidential public appearances.
1 the easier it is to persuade others to support presidential initiatives.
0 the less likely he will initiate new policy ventures. 

Among recent presidents, the average approval ratings in the public opinion polls have been
0 higher at the end of the president's term than at the beginning.
0 over 75 percent.
1 higher at the beginning of the president's term than at the end.
0 below 40 percent.
0 slowly rising over the course of a president's term(s). 

On average, those who identify with the president's party give approval more than ________percentage points higher than do those who identify with the opposition party.
0 10
0 20
1 40
0 30
0 50 

The primary factor influencing whether or not a person approves or disapproves of apresident's job performance is
0 age.
0 geographic location.
0 gender.
1 political party identification.
0 presidential personality. 

At the base of presidential evaluations is the
0 public's longstanding suspicion of excessive presidential power.
0 lack of well-defined opinions among most people.
0 predisposition of many people to be critical of government and politics in general.
0 public's indifference to the president.
1 predisposition of many people to support the president. 

The basic underpinning of approval or disapproval of a president is
0 the president's ability to get her/his program passed by Congress.
0 personality characteristics.
1 political party identification.
0 the state of the economy.
0 the behavior of the media. 

According to public opinion polls, presidents seem to be most popular
0 just before they leave office.
0 after they have introduced their first legislative package to Congress.
1 when they first enter office.
0 after they leave office.
0 during mid-term elections. 

Changes in presidential approval levels appear to be due primarily to
0 the president's personality.
0 how the media treat the president.
0 the financial elites ¹ responses to presidential policies.
1 the public's evaluation of how the president is handling policy areas.
0 how the president's policies affect people individually. 

  Rally events  
1 are specific and dramatic events that relate to international relations, directly involving the United States and the president.
0 have an enduring impact on a president's public approval.
0 involve economic upsurges that dramatically increase presidential popularity.
0 have no effect on presidential popularity even though presidents use them for that purpose.
0 occur frequently during a president's administration. 

The surge in President George Bush's approval ratings during and immediately following theGulf War in 1991 was an example of
0 the bandwagon effect.
1 a rally event.
0 the bully pulpit.
0 presidential coattails.
0 a pocket veto. 

The ultimate weapon in the president's arsenal of resources to influence Congress is probably
0 media support.
0 interest group support.
0 her/his fundraising ability.
1 mobilization of the public.
0 the support of Wall Street and the Federal Reserve Board. 

Presidential press conferences
0 give the president a chance to be spontaneous.
0 have not been used since the Nixon administration.
1 are not very useful means of eliciting information.
0 are required by the Constitution without saying how often.
0 are small, intimate meetings with the president. 

The president's ________ serves as the principal conduit of information from the White Houseto the press on a daily basis.
1 press secretary
0 vice president
0 Chief of Staff
0 Secretary of Information
0 Domestic Policy Advisor 

The individual who conducts daily press briefings and serves as a conduit of information fromthe White House is the
0 National Security Advisor.
0 Minister of Information.
0 president's secretary.
0 Chief of Staff.
1 press secretary. 

Most of the news coverage of the White House
0 is class analysis that seeks to explain which socio-economic groups are benefiting from or being injured by the latest policies.
1 focuses on the most visible layer of presidents ¹ personal and official activities.
0 focuses on the fundamental processes operating in the executive branch.
0 is concerned with the substance of policies.
0 is concerned with foreign policy issues. 

A large number of studies have concluded that the news media are
0 moderately biased toward liberal ideology.
1 not biased on any systematic basis, and the news is typically characterized by neutrality.
0 slightly biased toward the Democrats.
0 strongly biased toward the Democrats.
0 slightly biased toward the Republicans. 

News coverage of presidents and their activities
0 usually focuses on the personality of the president.
1 is not systematically biased in any direction.
0 tends to focus on the substance of presidential policies.
0 has a heavy liberal bias.
0 is typically unfavorable toward the White House. 

Which of the following statements about the presidency and democracy is FALSE?
0 There is little prospect of the presidency being a threat to democracy.
0 From the time the Constitution was written there has been a fear that the presidency would degenerate into a monarchy.
0 Concerns over presidential power are generally closely related to policy views.
1 Concerns about a tyrannical presidency were prevalent in the Reagan administration due to his ability to impose his will on Congress.
0 none of the above 


A budget deficit occurs when expenditures exceed
1 revenues.
0 borrowing.
0 appropriations.
0 authorizations.
0 inflation. 

Most of today's federal debt was run up by government borrowing during
0 World War II.
1 the 1980s.
0 the Vietnam War.
0 the Great Depression.
0 the Cold War (1947-1989). 

Approximately what percentage of the annual federal budget pays interest on the nationaldebt?
0 13
0 15
0 21
1 9
0 6 

Which of the following is NOT currently one of the major sources of federal revenue?
0 personal income taxes
0 social insurance taxes
0 borrowing
1 excise taxes
0 corporate income taxes 



A(n) ________ is a policy document allocating taxes and expenditures, or a series of goals withprice tags attached.
0 balance sheet
0 procurement
0 fiscal register
0 apportionment
1 budget 

A budget is
0 a blueprint for what the government should do.
0 a policy determination of how much to spend.
1 a policy document allocating burdens (taxes) and benefits (expenditures).
0 passed by the president's cabinet.
0 none of the above 

Congress was officially given the power to levy an income tax through the
1 Sixteenth Amendment.
0 Supreme Court case of Pollock v. Farmer's Loan and Trust Co. (1895).
0 revenue clause of the original Constitution.
0 Internal Revenue Act.
0 Balanced Budget Amendment. 



Which of the following is NOT the responsibility of the Internal Revenue Service?
0 investigating and prosecuting thousands of errant taxpayers or nonpayers of federal taxes
1 establishing the annual tax rates that Americans of different incomes must pay
0 auditing more than one million taxpayers annually
0 collecting the federal income tax
0 All of these are the IRS's responsibilities. 

Income taxes
1 provide the largest source of federal revenue.
0 were first used in 1915 after the Sixteenth Amendment was passed.
0 were declared constitutional in Pollock v. Farmer's Loan and Trust Co.
0 yield about 11 cents of every federal revenue dollar.
0 All of these are true. 

In order of decreasing amounts, the sources of federal revenue include
0 individual income tax, excise tax, corporate income tax, and social insurance receipts.
1 individual income tax, social insurance receipts, borrowing and corporate income tax.
0 social insurance receipts, corporate income tax, individual income tax, and borrowing.
0 corporate income taxes, personal income taxes, borrowing and social insurance taxes.
0 borrowing, individual income tax, social insurance receipts, and corporate income tax. 

Corporations today pay
0 income taxes which account for most federal revenue.
0 income taxes which account for more federal revenue than individual income taxes.
1 income taxes which account for much less federal revenue than individual income taxes.
0 no income taxes.
0 capital gains taxes and property taxes instead of income taxes. 

The income tax is generally progressive, meaning that
0 it increases incrementally on an annual basis.
1 those with more income pay higher rates of tax on their income.
0 those with more income pay more in taxes than those with less income.
0 it is a newer form of taxation than excise and sales taxes.
0 it is better than a flat tax. 

Social Security taxes are
1 paid for by employees and employers.
0 paid for by employees only.
0 paid for by employers only.
0 taxes paid on Social Security benefits.
0 levied and collected by state governments. 

Social insurance taxes
1 are earmarked for a specific purpose.
0 have grown very little in recent years.
0 go into the government's general money fund.
0 are paid only by employers.
0 all of the above 

The fastest growing source of federal revenue has been
0 fees for services.
1 Social Security taxes.
0 personal income taxes.
0 borrowing.
0 corporate income taxes. 

The government borrows money principally by
1 selling bonds.
0 maintaining numerous departmental credit card accounts.
0 printing more currency.
0 obtaining loans from foreign governments.
0 obtaining loans from the Federal Reserve. 

Who can purchase United States government bonds?
0 financial institutions
0 citizens
0 corporations
0 mutual funds
1 all of the above 

The federal debt
1 consists of all the money borrowed over the years by the national government and still outstanding.
0 is money owed to foreign nations by the United States government when it imports more goods than it exports.
0 is all money borrowed over the years by the federal government and owed to state governments.
0 is the difference between the amount of annual tax receipts and government expenditures.
0 is money owed by taxpayers to the United States government, but never paid. 

The federal debt in the United States
0 is the difference between federal government revenues and expenditures in a given year.
1 has increased due to the budget deficit caused by the difference between revenues and expenditures.
0 was eliminated due to George W. Bush's efforts to balance the budget.
0 consists of the interest that government must pay on the budget deficit.
0 is just under $1,000,000,000. 

Unlike state and local governments, the federal government is borrowing primarily for
1 its day-to-day expenses.
0 future development needs.
0 military defense.
0 printing money.
0 its capital needs. 

________ are revenue losses attributable to provisions of the federal tax laws which allow aspecial exemption, exclusion, or deduction.
0 Tax dividends
0 Fiscal seepages
0 Treasury bills
0 Tax reductions
1 Tax expenditures 

Tax expenditures consist of
0 the way taxes are spent by the federal government.
1 tax exemptions, deductions, and exclusions.
0 taxes paid by employers for social insurance programs.
0 direct grants-in-aid to individuals by the government.
0 the amount of deficit caused by revenue shortfalls. 

The federal income tax deduction for mortgage interest on an owner -occupied home is anexample of a
0 tax rebate.
0 negative income tax.
0 federally guaranteed loan.
1 tax expenditure.
0 tax refund. 

An example of a tax expenditure is
0 a lower tax rate for lower income families.
0 direct government support of a charity.
0 the social security system.
1 a tax deduction for the mortgage interest paid by homeowners.
0 the purchase of a Stealth Bomber by the Pentagon. 

The Office of Management and Budget estimates that the total tax expenditures is more than________ of the federal government's total receipts.
1 30 percent
0 10 percent
0 25 percent
0 40 percent
0 50 percent 

Tax expenditures tend to most benefit
0 lower-income people and the poor.
0 lower-middle class people and small businesses.
0 the government.
1 middle- and upper-income people and corporations.
0 state and local governments and school districts. 

Which of the following statements about President Reagan's 1981 tax cut is FALSE?
0 Taxes were indexed to the cost of living.
1 Corporate taxes were increased.
0 Federal taxes were reduced by 25 percent.
0 It provided new tax incentives for personal saving and investment.
0 none of the above 

Which of the following statements about President Reagan's 1981 tax cut is TRUE?
0 It reduced the federal government's tax expenditures.
1 It provided new tax incentives for personal saving and investment.
0 It spread the tax burden more fairly among taxpayers.
0 It led to a major reduction in the federal deficits.
0 It helped curb inflation. 

Which of the following was NOT a provision of President Reagan's 1985 tax simplificationprogram?
0 It removed several million low-income individuals from the tax rolls.
0 It eliminated or reduced the value of many tax deductions.
1 It increased the number of tax expenditures available to businesses.
0 It reduced the number of tax brackets to two.
0 none of the above 

Beginning in 1985, federal income taxes were ________ to the cost of living, so thatgovernment no longer got a larger percentage when inflation pushed incomes into higherbrackets while the tax rates stayed the same.
0 raised
0 added
1 indexed
0 lowered
0 flat-rated 

President Reagan's 1981 tax cuts were most beneficial to
0 low-income families.
0 the middle class.
0 the government.
1 high-income families.
0 the states 

In 1993, Congress agreed to President Clinton's proposal to
0 cut Social Security expenditures.
0 decrease the top corporate income tax rate.
1 raise the income tax rate for families in the highest income brackets.
0 eliminate all energy taxes.
0 establish national health insurance 

The United States government's annual budget is now approximately
1 $2.75 trillion.
0 $15 trillion.
0 $775 billion.
0 $12 trillion.
0 $11.3 trillion. 

Compared to most other countries with developed economies, the national, state, and localgovernments in the United States tax
0 about twice as heavily.
0 about one and a half times as much per capita.
0 about four times as heavily.
1 less.
0 at about the same rate. 


Which of the following countries have the smallest total tax revenues as a percentage of theirgross domestic product?
0 Sweden
0 Canada
0 Germany
1 United States
0 United Kingdom 

The federal budget consumes ________ of America's gross domestic product.
0 20 percent
0 30 percent
1 50 percent
0 25 percent
0 12 percent 

In order of decreasing amounts, federal expenditures include
0 national defense, interest on the national debt, and direct payments to individuals.
0 interest on the national debt, national defense, and direct payments to individuals.
0 national defense, direct payments to individuals, and state and local grants.
0 direct payments to individuals, national defense, and interest on the national debt.
1 none of the above 

America's national, state and local governments spend an amount equal to ________ of theGDP.
1 20 percent.
0 30 percent.
0 50 percent.
0 25 percent.
0 12 percent. 

During the 1950s and early 1960s, over half the federal budget was spent every year on
0 agricultural subsidies and programs.
0 Medicare.
0 the interstate highway program.
1 the Department of Defense.
0 Social Security. 

From the mid-1960s to the early 1980s, the biggest change in government spending was the
0 ratification and implementation of the Twenty-eighth Amendment, the Balanced Budget Amendment.
0 abandonment of the gold standard and the creation of the Federal Reserve System.
0 growth of new budgeting techniques such as zero-based budgeting.
1 increase in social service expenditures and decline in defense spending.
0 elimination of tax expenditures. 

The military industrial complex refers to
0 the global network of bases that the Department of Defense maintains.
1 the close relationship between defense officials and the corporations that supply their hardware needs.
0 the competition between the military and civilian industries for government dollars.
0 the government-owned industries that manufacture military weapons and large equipment.
0 the Pentagon and the buildings that surround it. 

The budget of the Department of Defense
1 decreased in the 1990s.
0 constitutes the bulk of the   uncontrollable   expenditures of the United States budget.
0 constitutes over half of all federal expenditures.
0 is the driving force in the expansion of the federal budget.
0 has increased despite the end of the Cold War. 

The purchasing of military hardware is known as
0 regalia.
1 procurement.
0 requisitioning.
0 appropriations.
0 mobilization. 

The biggest expenditure in the federal budget today is
0 foreign aid programs.
0 welfare programs for the poor.
0 interest on the debt.
1 income security programs.
0 defense. 

The Social Security Act, which set up the Social Security system, was passed in
1 1935.
0 1913.
0 1865.
0 1962.
0 1929. 

The Social Security Act was passed under the administration of President
1 Franklin D. Roosevelt.
0 Dwight D. Eisenhower.
0 Herbert Hoover.
0 Lyndon Johnson.
0 Abraham Lincoln. 

In 1965, ________ was added to the Social Security program to provide hospital and physiciancoverage to the elderly.
0 Medplan
0 Healthmark
1 Medicare
0 Medicaid
0 disability 

Medicare
0 is given only to those who do not have private insurance.
0 is administered separately from the social security system.
0 provides only hospital coverage to the poor.
0 is the most expensive of all the welfare programs, providing basic medical care for the poor.
1 provides both hospital and physician coverage to the elderly. 

The biggest slice of the federal budget pie belongs to
0 law enforcement.
0 national defense.
0 education aid.
1 income security expenditures.
0 health expenditures. 

By 1990, the Social Security system was financed by a payroll tax of
0 2 percent.
0 5 percent.
0 7.5 percent.
1 over 15 percent.
0 10 percent. 

A major feature of incremental budgeting is that it
1 provides small increases in the current budget over the previous year's budget.
0 greatly inflates government spending each year.
0 fragments the budget into many small items, making it hard to plan a unified budget.
0 reduces current budgets by small amounts over successive years.
0 reevaluates the budgetary base on which past budgets were built. 

An example of incremental budgeting is
0 reviewing an agency's budget to establish a lower base.
0 Carter's zero-based budgeting.
0 reducing an agency's budget a little each year.
1 giving an agency a little more than it had last year.
0 breaking a budget into its component parts and reviewing each part individually. 


________ refers to the concept that in the spending appropriations process, the best predictorof this year's budget is last year's budget plus a little bit more.
0 Inflation-plus budgeting
0 Indexing
0 Program Planning-Budgeting Systems
1 Incrementalism
0 Minimalist Budgeting 

The most prevalent model of budgetary decision making in practice is
0 program-planning budgeting.
1 incrementalism.
0 zero-based budgeting.
0 line-item budgeting.
0 rational party bargaining. 

Which of the following is NOT associated with incremental budgeting?
1 An agency or program must prove it still merits its very existence every year.
0 Most of the budget debate and attention is over an increase in the agency's funding.
0 Agencies and programs tend to safely assume they will receive at least what they had last year.
0 The budget for any given agency tends to grow a bit every year.
0 Agencies often pad their budgets a little bit. 

Budget items mandated by law or by a previous obligation are known as
1 uncontrollable expenditures.
0 increments.
0 fiscal mandates.
0 bearer bonds.
0 procurements. 

Social Security payments are an example of a(n)
0 increment.
0 indexing.
0 apportionment.
0 controllable expenditure.
1 entitlement. 

An   uncontrollable   expenditure in the federal budget is defined as
0 expenditures exceeding revenues so as to require borrowing to cover the difference.
1 an expenditure that is required by current law or a previous government obligation to people automatically eligible for some benefit.
0 an annual incremental increase in the cost of a program.
0 one in which more money must be appropriated to handle a national crisis.
0 the government's allowance for meeting budget requests. 

Social Security programs, interest on the national debt, and military pensions are examples of
0 tax expenditures.
1 uncontrollable expenditures.
0 revenue sources.
0 tax loopholes.
0 incremental expenditures. 

The biggest uncontrollable expenditure in the federal budget is
0 government retirement benefits.
0 interest on the national debt.
0 veterans aid.
0 national defense spending.
1 the Social Security system. 

An estimated ________ of the federal budget is considered uncontrollable, unless Congresschanges a law or existing benefit levels.
1 two-thirds
0 80 percent
0 one-half
0 one-third
0 one-fifth 

Approximately what percentage of the federal budget is uncontrollable?
0 one-fourth
1 two-thirds
0 almost all of it
0 one-half
0 one-third 

The ultimate power to determine how much the government will tax and spend, and what itwill spend taxes for, lies with
0 the Treasury Department.
0 the courts.
0 the president.
1 Congress.
0 the bureaucracy. 

In the House of Representatives, it is the ________ Committee that writes tax codes, subject tothe approval of Congress as a whole.
1 Ways and Means
0 Appropriations
0 Budget
0 Revenue
0 Finance 

Agencies invariably pad their budget requests because
1 they want the almost inevitable budget cuts to be bearable.
0 Congress would view a lower request as a sign of weakness.
0 it is an accepted part of zero-based budgeting.
0 their constituencies expect more benefits.
0 cost overruns almost always put them over budget. 

In the Senate, the ________ Committee is responsible for writing tax codes, subject to theapproval of Congress as a whole.
0 Revenue
0 Budget
0 Appropriations
0 Ways and Means
1 Finance 

The budget cycle begins in the executive branch ________ months before the fiscal year begins.
0 11
1 19
0 three
0 seven
0 24 or more 

The Director of the Office of Management and Budget
0 is a career official.
0 is elected by the Council of Economic Advisors.
0 is a congressional appointee.
1 is a presidential appointee requiring approval of the Senate.
0 is appointed by the Senate Finance Committee. 

The ________ is responsible for supervising preparation of the federal budget and advising thepresident on budgetary matters.
0 Treasury Department
1 Office of Management and Budget
0 Senate Finance Committee
0 General Accounting Office
0 Bureau of the Budget 



The heads of executive agencies send their budget requests to the
1 Office of Management and Budget.
0 Congressional tax committees.
0 president.
0 Treasury Department.
0 Congressional Budget Office. 

Agencies ¹ behavior and budgets are audited, monitored, and evaluated for Congress by the
0 Congressional Budget Office.
0 president.
0 Internal Revenue Service.
0 Office of Management and Budget.
1 General Accounting Office. 

The Office of Management and Budget parcels out money to government agencies and isaccountable to
0 the Internal Revenue Service.
0 Congress.
0 the secretary of the treasury.
1 the president.
0 the Congressional Budget Office. 

Which of the following statements about the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) isFALSE?
0 The OMB advises the president on budgetary matters.
1 The OMB is one of the few government agencies created by the Constitution.
0 The OMB supervises preparation of the federal budget.
0 Government agencies send their budget estimates to the OMB.
0 none of the above 

Once the Office of Management and Budget has prepared the federal budget,
0 it is sent to the Treasury Department for implementation.
1 the president makes revisions and submits it to Congress.
0 it is either signed into law or vetoed by the president.
0 Congress must vote it up or down as a package within ten days.
0 it immediately becomes law. 

According to the Constitution, all federal appropriations must be authorized by
0 the General Accounting Office.
0 the Office of Management and Budget.
0 the president.
1 Congress.
0 the secretary of the treasury. 

The Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 set up all of the followingEXCEPT
0 a Budget Committee in each house of Congress.
0 the Congressional Budget Office.
1 the Office of Management and Budget.
0 a fixed budget calendar mandated by law.
0 both A and B 


The congressional equivalent of the Office of Management and Budget is the
0 Congressional Office of Finance.
0 Joint Committee on Ways and Means.
0 Joint Committee on the Budget.
0 General Accounting Office.
1 Congressional Budget Office. 

One of the important purposes of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is to
0 require the federal government to balance its budget.
1 force Congress to consider the budget as a whole rather than in terms of individual appropriations.
0 restore budgetary control to the appropriations committees and subcommittees.
0 delegate effective budgetary authority to the president.
0 give Congress almost exclusive control over the federal budget. 

The main purpose of the Congressional Budget Office is to
1 advise Congress on the consequences of its budget decisions.
0 act as a liaison with interest groups.
0 prepare Congress ¹ own operating budget for salaries and supplies.
0 receive reports and recommendations from committees.
0 advise the president on congressional priorities in the budget. 

To set a limit on total government spending, both houses of Congress are required to pass a(n)________ every April, binding Congress to a total expenditure level, or bottom line, of allfederal spending for all programs.
0 budget
1 budget resolution
0 omnibus appropriations package
0 circumscription bill
0 authorization bill 

A budget resolution
0 revises program authorizations to achieve required savings.
0 resolves the differences between House and Senate versions of the budget.
0 is an act of Congress that establishes a discretionary government program or an entitlement.
0 must be passed to actually fund programs established by authorization bills.
1 sets limits on expenditures based on revenue projections. 

Congress attempts to bind itself to a total expenditure level that should form the bottom line ofall federal spending for all programs by passing
0 a zero-based binding resolution.
0 a budget reconciliation.
1 a budget resolution.
0 an appropriations bill.
0 an authorization bill. 

Budget ________ revises program authorizations to achieve required savings.
0 impoundment
0 realignment
0 closure
0 appropriation
1 reconciliation 

A budget reconciliation
0 reconciles the differences between House and Senate versions of the budget.
1 revises program authorizations to achieve required savings.
0 is an act of Congress that establishes a discretionary government program or an entitlement.
0 must be passed to actually fund programs established by authorization bills.
0 sets limits on expenditures based on revenue projections. 

An ________ bill is an act of Congress that establishes a discretionary government program oran entitlement, or that continues or changes such programs.
0 omnibus
1 authorization
0 impoundment
0 appropriations
0 enabling 

To actually fund a program, Congress must pass an ________ bill.
0 authorization
0 expenditure
1 appropriations
0 omnibus
0 impoundment 

Which of the following would be a specific example of an appropriations bill?
0 Congress voting to discontinue the federal income tax
0 a budget resolution passed by both Houses of Congress
1 a bill funding the Department of the Interior for the fiscal year
0 a bill to continue the space shuttle program for another five years
0 a bill establishing a national health insurance system 

Failing to meet its own budget timetable, Congress has frequently resorted to ________, whichare laws that allow agencies to spend at the previous year's level.
0 reconciliations
0 revenue extensions
0 appropriations
1 continuing resolutions
0 retrenchments 

An authorization bill
0 provides the funding for discretionary programs.
0 authorizes the president to spend specific line-item amounts in the final budget.
0 covers only one year at a time.
0 sets the maximum amount that may be spent for entitlement programs.
1 establishes, continues, or changes a discretionary program or an entitlement. 

In order to actually fund programs established by authorization bills, Congress must pass
0 a budget resolution.
0 a budget reconciliation.
1 an appropriations bill.
0 authorization vouchers.
0 a continuing resolution. 

The Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act called for the president to order________, if Congress failed to meet specific deficit-reduction goals.
0 reconciliations
0 defunding directives
0 re-authorizations
0 continuing resolutions
1 sequestrations 

The Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act
1 mandated maximum allowable deficit levels for each year until 1993, when the budget was to be balanced.
0 required automatic budget cuts, primarily in the area of defense.
0 froze all United States government expenditures at their 1988 levels for three years in an effort to eliminate the budget deficits.
0 allowed agencies to spend at the previous year's level.
0 called for tax increases to pay for federal spending. 

In 1990, Congress split discretionary spending into three categories. Which of the followingwas NOT one of the three categories?
0 domestic
0 defense
1 debt service
0 international
0 None of the above; debt service is a part of domestic expenditures. 

Near the end of 1990, Congress approved a major change in the making of budget policy thatshifted the focus from cutting spending to
1 controlling increases in spending.
0 eliminating government programs.
0 increasing taxes.
0 increasing non-tax revenues.
0 controlling the size of the deficit. 

By 2002, the budget deficit had increased again due to
0 decreased tax revenues.
0 income tax cut of 2001.
1 the first Iraq war.
0 both A and B
0 none of the above 

Some economists argue that less affluent voters will always use their votes to support publicpolicies that
0 cut all tax rates.
1 redistribute benefits from the rich to the poor.
0 favor large defense budgets.
0 keep taxes low.
0 increase spending on foreign aid and international programs. 

________ are not unwilling victims of big government and its big taxes in a democracy, theyare at least its co-conspirators.
1 Citizens
0 Members of Congress
0 Presidents
0 Bureaucrats
0 Political parties 

Research has found that the public sector expands principally
0 as a result of liberal political parties controlling the government.
0 as a result of Federal Reserve Board monetary policies influencing interest rates and currency reserves.
0 as a function of increased international economic competition.
1 in response to changes in economic and social conditions that affect the public's preferences for government activity.
0 in response to the perceived need for increased defense expenditures. 

Economists Allen Meltzer and Scott Richard argue that the cost of government grows because
0 democracy works best at the federal level.
0 big government is necessary for the maintenance of a capitalist system.
0 democracy is by nature an expensive form of government to operate.
1 people in a democracy use the government to secure benefits.
0 iron triangles pressure the government to expand their favored programs. 


Each bureaucratic agency is created initially by
0 constitutional provision.
0 the president.
0 the bureaucracy itself.
1 Congress.
0 order of a federal court. 


Which of the following is TRUE about the federal bureaucracy?
0 Most federal bureaucrats work in Washington, D.C.
1 The state and local governments have far more employees than the federal bureaucracy.
0 The size of the federal bureaucracy has grown dramatically over the past twenty years.
0 Most Americans are dissatisfied with their encounters with bureaucrats.
0 all of the above 

Studies have found that most Americans
0 dislike bureaucrats.
0 are indifferent about bureaucracies and bureaucrats.
1 are satisfied with the help received from bureaucrats.
0 actually like bureaucracies.
0 want the government bureaucracy dismantled. 

Which of the following statements about the size of bureaucracies is FALSE?
0 State and local public employees far outnumber civilian federal government employees.
1 As a percentage of America's total work force, federal government employment has been growing.
0 Almost all the growth in the number of public employees has occurred in state and local governments.
0 Federal government employment amounts to about three percent of all civilian jobs.
0 None of the above; all of the above statements are TRUE. 

As a percentage of the total work force, federal government employment is
0 rapidly becoming greater than employment in the private sector.
0 greater than state and local government employment.
0 rising.
1 declining.
0 stabilizing. 

The classic conception of a bureaucracy was advanced by ________, who argued that thebureaucracy was a   rational   way for a modern society to conduct its business.
1 Max Weber
0 Thomas Jefferson
0 John Locke
0 Charles L. Schultze
0 James Madison 

In addition to a hierarchical authority structure, Max Weber argued that a bureaucracyinvolves all of the following EXCEPT
0 extensive rules.
1 an incentive system.
0 task specialization.
0 the merit principle.
0 hierarchical authority structure. 

The Weberian theory of bureaucracies views them in the most positive light as
0 acquisitive.
0 inefficient.
0 monopolistic.
1 hierarchical.
0 democratic. 


The Weberian model views bureaucracies as
0 promoting good monopolies.
0 loosely organized and loosely run.
0 largely self-serving.
1 efficient and necessary.
0 hindering democracy. 

Which of the following would NOT be considered part of the Weberian model of bureaucracy?
0 task specialization
1 decentralized authority structure
0 extensive rules
0 impersonality
0 A and D only 

Which of the following statements about bureaucracies is FALSE?
0 Bureaucracies are simply a way of organizing people to perform work.
0 The vast majority of tasks carried out by governments are noncontroversial.
0 Bureaucracies receive very little credit when they function well.
1 Government bureaucracies have been shown to be less efficient and effective than private bureaucracies.
0 Bureaucracies are prevalent in all levels of government. 

The ________ employs about one -fourth of all federal civilian workers, more than any otherdepartment or agency.
0 Department of Education
0 Department of Health and Human Services
1 Department of Defense
0 Department of Justice
0 Department of Labor 

There are roughly ________ civilian and military federal government employees
0 800,000
0 3,000,000
0 2,100,000
1 4,000,000
0 500,000 


As a whole, the permanent federal bureaucracy is
0 less diverse in terms of the type of jobs than the private sector.
0 dominated by white males.
1 more broadly representative of the American people than the rest of the federal government.
0 composed of an American elite.
0 now employing 15 percent of the American work force. 

________ is a hiring and promotion system based on knowing the right people, working in anelection campaign, making large political donations, and/or having the right connections towin jobs with the government.
1 The patronage system
0 The federal Civil Service
0 The bureaucracy
0 The golden gate
0 Administrative discretion 

Patronage is a hiring and promotion system based on
1 knowing the right people.
0 civil service exams.
0 talent and skill.
0 the Pendelton Act.
0 the merit principle. 

Until the late-nineteenth century, most government employees got their jobs through
1 the patronage system.
0 the merit principle.
0 hereditary preferences.
0 civil service testing.
0 a lottery system. 

The ________ Act was passed partly as a memorial to the memory of President James Garfield,who was assassinated in 1881.
1 Pendleton Civil Service
0 Treason
0 Voting Rights
0 Hatch
0 Interstate Commerce 

The Pendleton Act established the
0 patronage system.
1 federal civil service.
0 Office of Management and Budget.
0 plum book.
0 Interstate Commerce Commission. 

The rationale for all civil service systems is based on
0 patronage.
1 the merit principle.
0 the Hatch Act.
0 the plum book.
0 voluntary service. 

The Hatch Act, passed in 1940,
0 established the patronage system for federal employment.
0 prohibited the president from firing the heads of independent executive agencies.
1 prohibits federal civil service employees from active participation in partisan politics.
0 required the publication of the plum book.
0 established the federal civil service. 

Once hired into the federal bureaucracy, a person is assigned a ________ rating, whichdetermines one's salary range.
0 Federal Register
0 Weber
1 General Schedule
0 step ladder
0 plum book 

The federal civil service was created by
0 Article IV of the Constitution.
0 an executive order of President Arthur.
0 the Office of Management and Budget.
0 the merit principle.
1 the Pendleton Act. 

The rationale for the civil service rests on the
0 goal of centralizing government employment at the federal level.
1 desire to create a nonpartisan government service and promotion on the basis of merit.
0 General Schedule rating system for patronage appointees.
0 the need to separate military institutions from civilian institutions to prevent undue military influence.
0 need for job replacements when a new party comes to power. 

Federal employees are prohibited from active participation in partisan politics through the
0 Twenty-fifth Amendment.
0 Pendleton Act.
0 Supreme Court ruling in Democratic National Committee v. Hayes.
1 Hatch Act.
0 merit system. 

Which of the following is a legitimate criticism of the federal civil service?
1 Firing incompetents is extremely difficult.
0 Workers are not protected against political firings.
0 It does not operate on the merit principle.
0 Too many federal civil servants are actively involved in partisan politics.
0 all of the above 

Which of the following would be included in a plum book?
0 doctors at a Veteran's Administration hospital
0 postal carriers
0 the phone numbers of a Congress member's sex partners
0 Senate committee chairs
1 Cabinet secretaries 

Which of the following statements about the hiring and firing of civil servants is FALSE?
0 The Office of Personnel Management has elaborate rules about hiring, promotion, and firing of civil servants.
0 The top of the civil service is composed of about 9,000 members of the Senior Executive Service.
0 Once hired, civil servants are assigned a General Schedule ranging from GS-1 to GS-18.
1 Due to the merit system, it is easy to fire incompetent civil servants.
0 none of the above 

The plum book lists
0 all federal contracts available for bid.
1 top federal jobs available by Presidential appointment.
0 all civil service jobs above GS-12.
0 job openings in the prestigious Office of Personnel Management.
0 appeals filed with the Merit Systems Protection Board. 

Which of the following statements about plum book appointees is FALSE?
0 Most presidents seek appointees with sympathy for similar policy positions.
0 Ambassadorship appointments often go to large campaign contributors.
1 Plum book appointees are often instrumental in changing and reforming their agencies.
0 Presidents often consider sex, region, and race in making plum book appointments.
0 none of the above 

Which of the following is NOT true about presidential appointees to bureaucracies?
0 They often do not know their own agency subordinates very well, much less people in other agencies.
1 They must be recommended by the Office of Personnel Management's   rule of three.  
0 As political appointees, they are often unaccustomed to the administrative routines, budget cycles, and legal complexities of their agencies or departments.
0 They tend to spend fewer years in their positions than those in the civil service.
0 none of the above 

According to Hugh Heclo, the plum book system of recruiting federal employees tends toresult in the appointment of
0 talented experts with proven party loyalty.
0 people with access to the Internet, but not necessarily the most qualified people.
0 senior civil servants to sensitive posts.
1 administrators who do not stay long enough in their appointed position to be effective.
0 large numbers of women and minorities, just as it was intended to do. 

Which Cabinet department is charged with overseeing the nation's national resources?
0 Homeland Security
0 Environmental Protection Agency
0 Defense
0 State
1 Interior 

The real work of a Cabinet department is done
0 by the entire Cabinet.
0 by the president's staff.
0 by the undersecretaries.
0 by the secretary.
1 in the bureaus. 

The largest federal agency based on dollars spent is the
0 Department of Defense.
0 Department of Justice.
0 State Department.
0 Department of Health and Human Services.
1 Social Security Administration. 

Which of these is the newest government agency?
0 Drug Enforcement Agency
1 Social Security Administration
0 Department of Health and Human Services
0 Drug Interdiction Agency
0 Cyberspace Commission 

The Cabinet department that has the largest budget is the Department of
1 Health and Human Services.
0 Defense.
0 Commerce.
0 the Treasury.
0 Education. 

Bureaus in the federal bureaucracy are also known as all of the following EXCEPT
0 an administration.
0 an office.
1 a department.
0 a service.
0 none of the above 

The Interstate Commerce Commission and the Federal Reserve Board are examples of
0 dependent presidential boards.
1 independent regulatory agencies.
0 government corporations.
0 Cabinet departments.
0 independent executive agencies. 

Which of the following statements about independent regulatory commissions is FALSE?
0 Regulatory commission members cannot be fired by the president.
0 Regulatory commissions consist of five to ten members.
0 Regulatory commission members are appointed by the president and confirmed by the Senate.
1 Regulatory commission members may not be drawn from the ranks of present or former employees of the regulated industry.
0 none of the above 


The parts of the federal bureaucracy with responsibility for different sectors of the economy,and making and enforcing rules designed to protect the public interest, are the
0 independent executive agencies.
1 independent regulatory agencies.
0 commercial ministries.
0 government corporations.
0 Cabinet departments. 

The General Services Administration and the National Aeronautical and Space Administrationare examples of
0 government corporations.
0 independent regulatory agencies.
0 Cabinet departments.
0 presidential administrative agencies.
1 independent executive agencies. 

Independent regulatory agencies have
0 complete independence from the president, but their policymakers are appointed by Congress.
1 powerful rule-making, dispute-settling, and enforcement authority.
0 no real enforcement power any more, and remain today as part of the federal government only in a ceremonial role.
0 no formal ties to either the president or the Congress.
0 governing commissions composed of long-time federal Civil Service employees. 

Amtrak and the United States Postal Service are examples of
1 government corporations.
0 independent executive agencies.
0 Cabinet departments.
0 executive commercial agencies.
0 independent regulatory agencies. 

Government corporations
0 operate an airline, manufacture steel, and provide health insurance.
1 provide services and charge for them.
0 tend to be captured by interest groups.
0 are independent regulatory agencies.
0 sell stock and pay dividends. 

An obstacle to the successful implementation of public policy is
0 the failure of Congress to pass authorizing legislation.
0 the over-specialization of civil service employees.
0 competition between the private and public sectors.
1 unclear policy goals and poorly designed policies.
0 all of the above 

Once a policy decision has been made, such as by passing a legislative act or issuing anexecutive order, the bureaucracy is responsible for
0 its ratification.
1 its implementation.
0 its deregulation.
0 funding it.
0 judging its merits. 

The main job of federal bureaucrats is to
0 advise the president and Cabinet on internal affairs.
0 countervail the power of private corporations, especially monopolies.
0 compete with the private sector for monopoly power.
0 protect the interests of their constituencies.
1 implement and regulate government policies. 

Creating new agencies, developing guidelines, and coordinating resources to achieve a policygoal is called
0 bureaucratization.
0 regulation.
1 implementation.
0 actualization.
0 policymaking. 

Which of the following is NOT a reason that policy implementation sometimes breaks down inthe federal bureaucracy?
0 fragmentation of responsibilities
1 lack of standard operating procedures
0 lack of clarity in the original policy decision
0 faulty program design
0 lack of resources 

Vigorous disputes over the implementation of Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972in regard to funding for women's athletic programs arose primarily due to
0 faulty program design.
1 lack of clarity in the original policy decision.
0 adherence to administrative routine.
0 fragmentation of responsibilities.
0 all of the above 

Section 844 of Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972
0 was declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court.
0 specifically prohibits sex discrimination in college sports.
0 was supported by most colleges and universities.
1 was vaguely written, eventually resulting in scores of court cases.
0 was interpreted by Congress to exclude college football. 

A major complaint of the Food and Drug Administration is
0 its lack of clarity.
0 the fragmentation of responsibilities.
0 that there is no administrative discretion.
0 that too much food is contaminated by dirt and rodents.
1 the shortage of personnel. 

Which of the following is NOT true about standard operating procedures?
0 They provide routine rules to help bureaucrats make numerous everyday decisions.
1 Each federal department and agency has a plum book which lists its standard operating procedures.
0 They can sometimes be so routinized that they are difficult to change even in the face of changing circumstances.
0 They are referred to as   red tape   by those who find them burdensome.
0 They are used by street-level bureaucrats. 

Standard operating procedures
0 usually prove to be unjust and discriminatory when followed to the letter.
1 save time and bring uniformity to complex organizations.
0 were waived by the Reagan Administration in an effort to make the bureaucracy more flexible and customize the solutions to problems.
0 give authority to administrative actors to select among various responses to a given problem.
0 are frustrating and inappropriate in addressing most situations. 

Standard operating procedures accomplish all of the following EXCEPT
0 bring uniformity to complex organizations.
0 save time.
0 make personnel interchangeable.
1 reduce red tape.
0 treat citizens equally, regardless of class or race. 

________ is the authority of administrative actors to select among various responses to a givenproblem.
0 Standard operating procedure
1 Administrative discretion
0 Administrators ¹ disposition
0 Executive power
0 Deregulation 

Standard operating procedures become frustrating to citizens and obstacles to action whenthey
1 do not directly apply to a particular situation.
0 slow bureaucratic responses to citizens ¹ needs.
0 are not specifically codified.
0 transfer personnel to different posts.
0 are not closely followed. 

The authority of administrative actors to select among various responses to a given problem iscalled
0 policy implementation.
0 selective management.
0 the merit principle.
0 the definition of alternatives.
1 administrative discretion. 

Administrative discretion is greatest when
0 rules and regulations are not written down.
0 when standard operating procedures are used.
0 an agency has elaborate rules and regulations.
0 a particular agency is the subject of media coverage.
1 rules do not fit a case. 

The Federal Aviation Administration's protocol for for hijackings assumed that
0 the pilot would be able to radio air traffic controllers and alert them to the problem.
0 the FAA would be able to pinpoint the aircraft involved.
0 there would be enough time for the government to formulate a response.
0 the hijackers would be motivated in part by a desire to stay alive.
1 All of the above 

Those civil service employees who are in constant contact with the public (often a hostile one)and have considerable discretion are known as
1 street-level bureaucrats.
0 routinizers.
0 General Schedule foot soldiers.
0 the Senior Executive Service.
0 civil servants. 

Administrative personnel who exercise discretion, pay attention to routine, and deal directlywith clients,
1 are called street-level bureaucrats.
0 are limited to high-level positions in the administration.
0 implement federal policies.
0 are part of the Senior Executive Service.
0 are usually dismissed for not following standard operating procedures. 

Which of the following would not be considered a street-level bureaucrat?
0 a municipal court judge
1 an assistant secretary in the Department of Transportation
0 a welfare worker
0 a mail carrier who delivers mail exclusively in a high-rise building
0 a police officer 

When bureaucrats are asked to execute orders with which they do not agree,
0 they usually ignore the orders.
0 they are likely to lose their jobs if they do not follow through with the orders.
0 they can file a Conflict Of Interest Form and will be exempted from that duty by their boss.
0 implementation follows standard operating procedures.
1 slippage is likely to occur between policy decisions and performance. 

Which of the following statements is FALSE?
1 Bureaucrats are often fired for using too much administrative discretion.
0 Pay raises in the bureaucracy tend to be small and across -the-board.
0 Removing appointed officials may be politically embarrassing to the president.
0 A government agency cannot expand just because it is performing a service effectively and efficiently.
0 none of the above 

The diffusion of responsibility within the bureaucracy
1 makes the coordination of policies both time-consuming and difficult.
0 increases administrative discretion.
0 allows for a diversity of opinion thus facilitating effective administration.
0 helps diminish the use of administrative discretion.
0 facilitates the use of inter-bureaucracy standard operating procedures. 

Proposals to reorganize the government in order to solve the problem of bureaucraticfragmentation
1 are often opposed by agencies not wanting to be submerged within a broader bureaucratic unit.
0 tend to be supported by Republican presidents, who advocate governmental centralization.
0 are opposed by congressional committees, fearing they will be given greater responsibility to oversee larger and more diverse agencies.
0 are supported by interest groups, who feel they could better control the regulatory programs of a reorganized bureaucracy.
0 are supported and opposed for all of these reasons. 

The Voting Rights Act of 1965
0 was very difficult to implement because of the fragmentation of responsibility for implementing it.
1 was successfully implemented thanks to its clear goal, its clear methods to achieve the goal, and its lack of bureaucratic fragmentation.
0 failed to achieve its policy goals because of the outright hostility of street -level bureaucrats.
0 was impossible to implement because of a lack of clarity in the legislation.
0 All but D are true. 

The Voting Rights Act of 1965 was successful for all of the following reasons EXCEPT
0 its goal was clear.
0 its implementation was straightforward.
0 the authority of the implementors was plain.
1 it was universally supported.
0 none of the above 

The use of government authority to control or change some practice in the private sector isknown as
0 socialism.
1 regulation.
0 oversight.
0 executive review.
0 public administration. 

The use of governmental authority to control or change some practice in the private sector iscalled
1 regulation.
0 patronage.
0 administrative discretion.
0 policy implementation.
0 public administration. 

Which of the following statements about government regulation in America is accurate?
0 The Constitution set up only six regulatory agencies; the others have been created within the past 100 years or so.
0 The Federal Communications Commission was the first independent regulatory agency.
1 Until 1887, the federal government made almost no regulatory policies and had no regulatory agencies.
0 Regulatory agencies tended to be more popular in the early years of the nation's history, then grew more controversial during the late-nineteenth century.
0 both A and C 

In the case of Munn v. Illinois, decided in 1877, the United States Supreme Court
0 ruled that states could not impose corporate income taxes.
0 ruled that the Civil Service System was constitutional.
0 outlawed the patronage system.
0 held that government had no right to regulate the business operations of a firm.
1 upheld the right of government to regulate the business operations of a firm. 

Until 1887, the federal government
1 had almost no regulatory policies.
0 was involved only in social regulation.
0 owned and operated most of the major industries in the country.
0 forbade the states from passing regulatory policies.
0 was involved only in economic regulation. 

The Supreme Court case of Munn v. Illinois (1877)
0 declared that regulation was not within the realm of state powers.
0 first established the right to own property as one of the rights of the Bill of Rights.
0 set the precedent for deregulation.
1 upheld the right of government to regulate the business operations of a firm.
0 upheld the constitutionality of the Interstate Commerce Commission. 

Most regulatory agencies adopt specific ________ to carry out a policy, based on what theybelieve was the intended purpose of the specific policy at hand.
1 guidelines
0 iron triangles
0 incentive systems
0 mandates
0 merit principles 

Whatever strategy Congress permits a regulatory agency to use, all regulation contains thefollowing elements EXCEPT
0 some means of enforcing compliance.
0 a grant of power and set of directions from Congress.
0 a set of rules and guidelines by the regulatory agency itself.
1 an incentive system to maximize performance by those regulated.
0 none of the above 

All regulations contain each of the following elements EXCEPT
0 a grant of power and set of directions from Congress
0 some means of enforcing compliance with congressional goals and agency regulations
1 presidential oversight and control of enforcement
0 a set of rules and guidelines by the regulatory agency itself
0 All of these are elements of the regulatory process. 

When Congress passes regulatory legislation for which it has established goals, it then
1 grants power to regulatory agencies to develop guidelines and enforce compliance.
0 assigns responsibility for administration to regulatory agencies and responsibility for enforcement to the courts.
0 establishes the guidelines that regulatory agencies must implement.
0 grants interest groups the power to develop the rules governing the new policy.
0 authorizes the president to use his administrative discretion to implement the legislation. 

One proposed solution to the   problem   of the proliferation of regulatory agencies and policieshas been
1 deregulation.
0 deproliferation.
0 budget cuts.
0 standard operating procedures.
0 the incentive system. 

Deregulation has resulted, at least in part, in each of the following EXCEPT
0 environmental damage.
1 the proliferation of government agencies.
0 competitive airline fares.
0 an expensive bailout of the savings and loan industry.
0 less government oversight in some key areas. 

Which of the following is NOT an accusation made against the regulatory system?
1 Excessive regulation contributed to the savings and loan industry disaster of the 1980s.
0 If the producer is faced with expensive regulations, costs will inevitably be passed along to the consumer in the form of higher prices.
0 Regulations do not always work well, and they simply create massive regulatory bureaucracies.
0 Other nations have laxer regulations on pollution, worker safety, and other business practices, thus American exports often cost more.
0 All of these have been criticisms of regulation. 

Each of the following is a criticism of regulation EXCEPT that it
1 lowers prices.
0 does not work.
0 distorts market forces.
0 is too complex.
0 gives bureaucrats too much power. 

Most of the government is composed of
0 regulators.
0 lawyers.
1 bureaucrats.
0 elected legislators.
0 politicians. 

Executive orders are issued by
0 independent regulatory agencies.
0 any federal agency or department.
0 Congress.
0 members of the Senior Executive Service.
1 the president. 

Which of the following is NOT a method a president can use to control the bureaucracy?
0 issue executive orders or more informal requests
1 rewrite statutes to make instructions clearer as to how policies are intended
0 appoint people to head an agency who share the president's goals and strategies
0 tinker with an agency's recommended budget
0 request a congressional oversight hearing 

Which of the following statements about Congress and the bureaucracy is FALSE?
0 Bureaucracies can help Congress find answers to policy problems.
0 Bureaucracies help provide services to constituents.
0 Members of Congress often find a big bureaucracy congenial.
1 Congress has found it easy to control the bureaucracy.
0 none of the above 

Congress tries to control the bureaucracy through each of the following EXCEPT
0 rewriting legislation.
0 influencing the appointment of agency heads.
0 holding hearings.
1 issuing congressional orders.
0 both A and B 

Congress tries to control the bureaucracy through
1 rewriting laws and budgets and holding hearings.
0 deregulation.
0 the use of executive orders and appointments.
0 the creation of   iron triangles.  
0 all of the above 

To limit bureaucratic discretion and make its instructions clearer, Congress can
0 deregulate.
1 write new and more detailed legislation.
0 hold congressional hearings.
0 reregulate.
0 threaten to cut an agency's budget. 

As the oversight powers of Congress in regard to the bureaucracy have become morevigorous,
0 Congress is increasingly the policy-implementation branch of government.
0 it has become easier to rein in the bureaucracy.
1 they have also become more fragmented.
0   iron triangles   have weakened considerably.
0 the amount of government corruption has decreased dramatically. 

A major problem for presidents and Congress in controlling bureaucracies is the existence of
0 the plum book.
0 Supreme Court rulings curbing the scope of their oversight.
1   iron triangles.  
0 standard operating procedures.
0 the incentive system. 

An   iron triangle   is also referred to as
0 a government corporation.
0 a reverse diagonal.
1 a subgovernment.
0 the alphabet soup of American government.
0 an issue network. 


A(n) ________ consists of an administrative agency, an interest group, and a congressionalcommittee or subcommittee.
0 issue network
0 independent executive agency
0 triumvirate
0 administrative discretion triad
1   iron triangle   

  Iron triangles   face challenges from a growing number of
0 street-level bureaucrats.
0 subgovernments.
0 plastics and softer metals.
0 administrative discretions.
1 issue networks. 


Subgovernments promote
0 centralization of authority.
0 strong executive branch control of policymaking.
0 the control of the bureaucracy by Congress.
1 decentralized and fragmented policymaking.
0 presidential control of bureaucratic discretion. 

A group of participants in bureaucratic policymaking with technical policy expertise andintellectual and emotional commitment to the issue is called
0 a government corporation.
0 an   iron triangle  .
0 a subgovernment.
1 an issue network.
0 a vested cohort. 

Which of the following is NOT an area in which an   iron triangle   has controlled federal policyover the past several decades?
0 nuclear power policy
1 environmental policy
0 pesticide policy
0 smoking & tobacco policy
0 none of the above 

Which of the following is NOT true about   iron triangles  ?
0 They present tremendous difficulties for Congress and the president when they attempt to control the bureaucracy.
0 They add a strong decentralizing and fragmenting element to the government's policymaking process.
0 They are also known as subgovernments.
1 They are indestructible.
0 none of the above 

  Iron triangles   are composed of
0 primarily iron, but also metallic, alloys.
1 bureaucratic agencies, interest groups, and congressional committees.
0 urban bureaucracies, state bureaucracies, and federal bureaucracies.
0 congressional committees, state governments, and bureaucratic agencies.
0 senators, governors, and department heads. 

In 1887, Congress established the first regulatory agency, the ________, and charged it withregulating the railroads, their prices, and their services to farmers.
0 Department of Transportation
0 Railroad Commission
0 American Railway Union
0 Federal Trade Commission
1 Interstate Commerce Commission 

Which of the following statements about bureaucracies and the scope of government isFALSE?
1 When the president and Congress chose to deregulate certain areas of the economy or cut taxes, the bureaucracy prevented them from doing so.
0 The federal bureaucracy has actually shrunk in size relative to the population it serves.
0 The bureaucracy is now expected to play an active role in dealing with social and economic problems.
0 The federal bureaucracy has not grown over the past two generations.
0 none of the above 


The great majority of America's judicial business is transacted in
1 state courts of original jurisdiction.
0 Tax Court.
0 Supreme Courts.
0 the United States courts of appeal.
0 federal courts of original jurisdiction. 

Which of the following statements about the courts is FALSE?
0 Supreme Court decisions may directly shape people's lives.
1 Most of American judicial policy is made in the Supreme Court.
0 The great bulk of American legal business is transacted in the less-noticed courts.
0 The Supreme Court decides a handful of key issues each year.
0 The judicial system in the U.S. is, at least in principle, an adversarial one. 

One of the differences between criminal law and civil law is that in civil law
1 there is no charge that a law has been violated.
0 there is no jury.
0 the case cannot be appealed.
0 the government cannot be one of the litigants.
0 common law takes precedent over statutory law. 

Litigants are
0 the attorneys.
1 the plaintiff and the defendant.
0 the plaintiff and the plaintiff's attorney.
0 the defendant and the defendant's attorney.
0 plaintiffs. 

Not everyone can challenge a law. Litigants must have what is called ________, meaning thatthey must have a serious personal stake in the case, typically determined by whether or notthey have sustained or are in danger of an injury.
1 standing to sue
0 a writ of mandamus
0 stare decisis
0 original jurisdiction
0 legal prerogative 

Class action suits
0 are those which have to do with constitutional issues, thus broadening the standing to sue.
0 are filed by students seeking to force a school district to offer additional sections of perpetually over-enrolled courses.
1 permit a small number of people to sue on behalf of all other people similarly situated.
0 may only be filed if all of those with a standing to sue agree to participate.
0 are routinely filed by teachers ¹ groups to prepare the way for legal strikes. 

Courts may only decide ________ disputes.
0 civil
0 constitutional
1 justiciable
0 criminal
0 class action 

Standing to sue is determined by
0 the judiciary committee of Congress.
0 whether or not the case involves a class action suit.
0 the Solicitor General's office.
1 whether or not the litigants have a serious interest in a case.
0 a court-appointed jury. 

Merely being a taxpayer and being opposed to a law does not provide the standing necessaryto challenge that law in court except in cases pertaining to
0 taxation.
1 governmental support for religion.
0 environmental protection.
0 civil liberties.
0 racial or sexual discrimination. 

Class action suits
1 permit a small number of people to sue on behalf of all other people similarly situated.
0 are cases in which the government sues on behalf of groups of people unable to go to court for a variety of reasons.
0 are civil suits brought to the courts by interest groups.
0 are civil or criminal cases involving discrimination on the basis of income.
0 involve groups of people suing each other rather than individuals. 

One constraint on federal courts is that they may decide only
0 statutory law.
0 appellate cases.
1 justiciable disputes.
0 constitutional issues.
0 interstate conflicts. 

All of the following are examples of standing to sue EXCEPT
0 having sustained a direct injury from another party.
0 serious interest in the case.
1 raising a political question.
0 having sustained a direct injury from the government.
0 being a member of a class 


Lower federal courts of general jurisdiction were established by
0 President George Washington.
1 the Judiciary Act of 1789.
0 the Eleventh Amendment.
0 the Constitution.
0 the Supreme Court. 

Courts with ________ hear cases brought to them on appeal from a lower court.
0 stare decisis
0 original jurisdiction
0 judicial review
0 justiciable disputes
1 appellate jurisdiction 

A legislative court is
0 a state-level court.
0 the initial level of federal courts for most disputes.
1 staffed by judges who lack the protections against removal or salary reductions while in office.
0 staffed by judges who serve for life.
0 one that specializes in the review of legislation for its constitutionality. 

The entry point for most litigation in the federal courts is in one of the ________ courts.
0 appellate
1 district
0 Superior
0 legislative
0 municipal 

There are ________ federal district courts.
0 53
0 12
0 9
1 91
0 50 

Courts of original jurisdiction are
0 usually federal courts.
1 trial courts.
0 highly specialized in the types of cases they hear.
0 usually appellate courts.
0 the courts that were established by the original Constitution rather than by Congress. 

Courts with appellate jurisdiction
0 determine the facts about a case.
1 review the legal issues involved in a case.
0 hear only criminal cases.
0 have no original jurisdiction.
0 hear only civil cases 

The Court of Claims is a
0 district court.
0 state court.
1 legislative court.
0 Constitutional court.
0 presidential court. 


Which of the following is NOT under the jurisdiction of the district courts?
0 supervision of bankruptcy proceedings
0 supervision of the naturalization of aliens
0 admiralty and maritime law cases
1 the majority of all criminal cases in the United States
0 civil suits under federal law 

The only federal courts in which trials are held, and in which juries may be impaneled, are the
0 superior courts.
0 legislative courts.
0 courts of claims.
1 district courts.
0 courts of appeal. 

About 98 percent of all criminal cases in the United States are heard in
0 federal district courts.
0 appellate courts.
1 state and local court systems.
0 the Supreme Court.
0 legislative courts. 

An important player at the district court level in each district is the ________, nominated bythe president and confirmed by the Senate. He or she serves at the discretion of the president.
0 Solicitor General
0 county clerk
0 federal marshal
1 United States attorney
0 federal magistrate 

Most criminal and civil cases
0 are decided by jury trial in state courts.
1 never reach trial, but are settled out of court.
0 are appealed to a higher court.
0 are decided by a judge in federal district court.
0 eventually end up in the Supreme Court. 

The vast majority of all civil and criminal cases
1 begin and end in state courts.
0 involve federal law, but are tried in state courts.
0 begin and end in federal courts.
0 begin in state courts and are appealed to federal courts.
0 involve state laws that are tried in federal courts. 

Federal magistrates perform each of the following functions EXCEPT
0 preside over some trials.
0 issue warrants for arrest.
0 hear motions subject to review.
1 prosecute violations of federal law.
0 none of the above 

The United States government is represented in civil cases in district courts by a
0 district judge.
0 United States marshal.
0 federal magistrate.
1 United States attorney.
0 none of the above 

About 75 percent of the more than 63,000 cases heard in the United States courts of appealcome from
0 challenges to orders of many federal regulatory agencies, such as the Securities and Exchange Commission.
0 the Supreme Court.
0 the Superior Courts.
1 the district courts.
0 the legislative courts. 

The jurisdiction of the district courts extends to each of the following EXCEPT
0 federal crimes.
0 supervision of bankruptcy proceedings.
1 appeals from state courts.
0 admiralty and maritime law cases.
0 federal civil suits. 

Which of the following is NOT true about the United States courts of appeal?
0 They hold no actual trials, hear no testimony, and do not impanel juries.
0 Their focus is on correcting errors of procedure and law that occurred in the original proceedings of the case.
1 Their decisions are final and cannot be appealed to the Supreme Court.
0 Their decisions set precedent for all the courts and agencies within their jurisdiction.
0 none of the above 

For handling cases at the courts of appeal level, the United States is divided into ________judicial circuits, including one for the District of Columbia.
0 55
0 26
1 12
0 51
0 91 

Each court of appeals normally hears cases in panels consisting of ________ judges.
0 9
0 6
0 12
0 7
1 3 


Appeals regarding patents would be heard by
1 the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit.
0 the Court of Claims.
0 the Solicitor General.
0 a Federal District Court.
0 the United States Supreme Court. 

The Supreme Court consists of the chief justice and ________ associate justices.
1 eight
0 ten
0 six
0 twelve
0 nine 

The functions of the Supreme Court include each of the following EXCEPT
0 maintaining national supremacy in the law.
0 resolving conflicts among the states.
1 reviewing the evidence in cases involving crimes committed by public officials.
0 ensuring uniformity in the interpretation of national laws.
0 rule on cases accepted from lower courts. 

The size of the Supreme Court has remained the same since
0 the Judiciary Act of 1789.
0 the Twelfth Amendment was ratified in 1804.
0 President Roosevelt expanded it in 1937.
0 the original Constitution specified the number of justices.
1 President Ulysses S. Grant took office in 1869. 

The United States Supreme Court's jurisdiction includes
1 appellate jurisdiction from both state and federal courts.
0 original jurisdiction only in cases involving foreign diplomats.
0 only appellate jurisdiction.
0 original jurisdiction in cases involving citizens from one state only if it involves a federal question.
0 all of the above 

Most decisions handed down by the Supreme Court are cases involving
0 original jurisdiction.
0 appeals from state courts.
0 federal felonies involving   exceptional circumstances.  
1 appeals from lower federal courts.
0 appeals from state supreme courts. 

Most cases heard by the Supreme Court come from
0 matters over which the Supreme Court has original jurisdiction.
0 state criminal courts.
0 the United States Court of Appeal for the Federal Circuit.
1 civil actions from lower federal courts.
0 civil actions from state courts. 

Which of the following statements about federal judges is FALSE?
0 All federal judges are nominated by the president and confirmed by a majority of the Senate.
0 Federal judges may be removed from office only by conviction of impeachment.
0 Members of the federal judiciary can not have their salaries reduced.
1 Only seven Supreme Court justices have ever been removed from office.
0 none of the above 

The customary manner in which the Senate disposes of federal judicial nominations in onestate is through
0 the seniority system.
1 senatorial courtesy.
0 majority vote, usually along party lines.
0 judicial review.
0 state's review. 

Senators have dominated the selection of judges for the federal district courts through
0 their control of the budget.
0 their power over court jurisdictions.
0 the influence of the Senate Judiciary Committee.
1 the custom of senatorial courtesy.
0 all of the above 

Which of the following statements about senatorial courtesy is FALSE?
0 When there is a vacancy for a federal judgeship, the relevant senator will suggest one or more names to the Attorney General and the president.
0 Presidents usually check carefully with the relevant senator ahead of time so that they will avoid making a nomination that will fail to be confirmed.
1 To invoke senatorial courtesy, the relevant senator must provide documented evidence why the nominee is not fit for office.
0 Federal judicial nominations are not confirmed when opposed by a senator of the president's party from the state in which the nominee is to serve.
0 none of the above 

Which of the following statements about judicial selection in the lower courts is FALSE?
0 The president usually has more influence in the selection of judges to the federal courts of appeal than to federal district courts.
0 Sitting judges may be asked to evaluate prospective judicial nominees.
0 The Department of Justice and the Federal Bureau of Investigation conduct competency and background checks on prospective judicial nominees.
1 Candidates for judicial nomination rarely campaign for the positions themselves.
0 none of the above 

Which of the following statements about the selection of Supreme Court justices is FALSE?
0 The president usually relies on the Attorney General and the Department of Justice to identify and screen candidates for the Court.
1 Senators play a greater role in the recruitment of Supreme Court justices than in the selection of lower court judges.
0 The president usually operates under fewer constraints in nominating members to the Supreme Court than to the lower courts.
0 Candidates for nomination to the Supreme Court usually keep a low profile.
0 none of the above 

About ________ of nominees to the Supreme Court fail to be confirmed.
0 38 percent
0 5 percent
0 50 percent
1 20 percent
0 10 percent 

In its investigation of Supreme Court nominees, the Senate Judiciary Committee
0 follows the custom of senatorial courtesy and confirms nominees approved by their home state senators.
0 limits its investigation to the nominee's judicial integrity and experience.
0 is basically a rubber stamp for the president's nomination.
1 may probe a nominee's judicial philosophy in great detail.
0 none of the above 

In order to convince moderate senators to join them, opponents of a nomination for theSupreme Court try to focus on a nominee's
0 mistrial rate.
0 ideology.
0 political activities.
1 competence or ethics.
0 age. 

In order to defeat a judicial nomination, opponents in the Senate usually must
0 get public support in opposition to the nomination.
0 be in the majority and be in the opposite party as the president.
1 be able to question a nominee's competence or ethics.
0 get the American Bar Association on their side.
0 prove the nominee's ideological extremism. 

President Reagan's nomination of Robert Bork as an associate justice on the Supreme Court
1 was rejected by the Senate.
0 was rejected by both the House and the Senate.
0 was withdrawn after it came to light that Bork had smoked marijuana while a law professor at Harvard.
0 was confirmed by the closest margin in the twentieth century.
0 based on Bork's extensive legal experience. 

Supreme Court justice Clarence Thomas
0 has no identifiable ideology.
0 is an ideological moderate.
0 is an ideological moderate who advocates a jurisprudence of original intent.
0 is ideologically liberal.
1 is ideologically conservative. 

President ________ appointed more women, African Americans, and Hispanics to the federaldistrict and circuit courts than all previous presidents combined.
1 Jimmy Carter
0 Lyndon Johnson
0 Ronald Reagan
0 Gerald Ford
0 George Bush 

The first woman appointed to the United States Supreme Court was
1 Sandra Day O ¹Connor.
0 Frances Perkins.
0 Hillary Clinton.
0 Charlotte Perkins Gilman.
0 Ruth Bader Ginsberg. 

Who currently serves on the Supreme Court as the chief justice?
0 William Rehnquist
0 Samuel Alito
0 Harriet Miers
1 John Roberts
0 Dennis Kucinich 

Usually more than 90 percent of presidents ¹ judicial nominations are members of
0 the Department of Justice.
0 law school faculties.
0 state legislatures.
1 their own party.
0 Congress. 

What percentage of presidents ¹ judicial nominations are members of their own parties?
0 almost 80 percent
0 slightly more than half
0 except for rare occasions, 100 percent
1 usually more than 90 percent
0 about 75 percent 

The most important factors influencing the president's selection of judges and justices appearsto be
1 ideology and partisanship.
0 race and gender.
0 judicial and elective experience.
0 geography and religion.
0 their law school rank. 

Under Ronald Reagan's administration, there was a strong tendency to appoint federal judgeson the basis of
0 ascriptive characteristics.
0 experience in the law profession.
1 ideology.
0 partisan involvement.
0 their contributions to Reagan's presidential campaign. 

Supreme Court justices often try to time their retirement
0 to maximize their government retirement pension.
0 in such a way as to maximize their historical impact.
1 so that a president with compatible views will choose their successor.
0 so they can resign in protest of a major majority decision that they disagree with.
0 near election time so that the Supreme Court nomination becomes an election issue. 

President Eisenhower's selection of Earl Warren and William Brennan to the Supreme Court isan example of
0 the Senate majority's tendency to reject nominees of the opposing political party.
0 how religion and region were once important selection criteria.
0 how a president can mold the Court to his ideology.
1 how presidents can become disappointed with their selections.
0 the importance of partisanship in the selection of justices. 

Presidents are disappointed with their judicial nominations to the Court about ________percent of the time.
0 33
0 15
0 10
1 25
0 50 

President Franklin Roosevelt's appointees to the Supreme Court
1 liberalized the Court.
0 routinely ruled his New Deal legislation unconstitutional.
0 made the Court more conservative.
0 proved to have no effect upon the decisions of the Court.
0 proved to be great disappointments to him on issue after issue. 

One of the most important factors that brings potential federal judges to the attention ofsenators and the Department of Justice is their
0 stand on issues.
0 conviction rates.
0 total honesty and integrity.
0 ideological neutrality.
1 involvement in partisan politics. 

If ________ Supreme Court justices agree to grant review of a case, it can be scheduled for oralargument or decided on the basis of the written record already on file with the Court.
0 six
0 two
1 four
0 nine
0 a majority of 

The most common way for the Supreme Court to put a case on its docket is by issuing a(n)________, a formal document that calls up a case which deals with a Constitutional question orin which state laws are claimed to violate federal law.
0 writ of mandamus
0 stare decisis
0 amicus curiae brief
0 per curiam decision
1 writ of certiorari 

In order for the Supreme Court to hear oral arguments or decide a case on the written record,
0 a majority of the justices must agree to take the case.
1 four justices must agree to take the case.
0 the case must first be sent to it by the president.
0 only the chief justice must agree to take the case.
0 all justices must agree to take the case. 

A writ of certiorari
0 means that judges have decided a case on the basis of precedent.
0 frees a detained person whom a court has found is being held in violation of due process.
1 is used by the Supreme Court to call up a case.
0 is the official record of a court's decision, stating the facts of the case and the rationale for the decision.
0 is used to move a case from a court of original jurisdiction to a federal district court. 

The ________ is a presidential appointee who is in charge of the appellate court litigation ofthe federal government, works out of the Department of Justice, and can have an importantinfluence on the Supreme Court.
0 Adjutant General
1 Solicitor General
0 United States attorney
0 Attorney General
0 chief justice 

Which of the following is NOT a function of the United States Solicitor General's office?
0 decide whether or not to appeal cases the government has lost in the lower courts
0 review and modify the briefs presented in government appeals
1 require the Supreme Court to review a government case on appeal
0 represent the government before the Supreme Court
0 none of the above 

In a typical year, the Supreme Court issues ________ formal written opinions that could serveas precedent, and thus as the basis of guidance for lower courts.
0 more than 1,000
1 fewer than 100
0 between 150 and 500
0 more than 500, but less than 1,000
0 fewer than ten 

A ________ is a Supreme Court ruling without explanation which resolves an immediate casebut has no value as precedent because the Court does not offer reasoning that would guidelower courts in future decisions.
0 stare decisis
0 writ of certiorari
0 concurring opinion
1 per curiam decision
0 writ of mandamus 

Those who are interested in the outcome of a case, but are not formal litigants, sometimessubmit ________ briefs, raising points of view and presenting information that they hope willinfluence the Supreme Court's decision.
0 certiorari
0 stare decisis
1 amicus curiae
0 per curiam decision
0 concurring 

Principal reasons for the Court's choosing to hear a case would include each of the followingEXCEPT
0 conflict between different lower courts on the interpretation of federal law.
0 cases that involve major issues, like civil liberties.
0 disagreement between a majority of the Supreme Court and lower court decisions.
1 politically hot and divisive cases.
0 the justices ¹ law clerks recommend doing so. 

The decision to appeal cases the federal government has lost in the lower courts is made by the
0 majority of the Supreme Court.
1 Solicitor General.
0 president.
0 chief justice.
0 district judge. 


An amicus curiae brief may be submitted by
0 lawyers representing each side of a case.
0 a judge to a jury outlining the parameters a jury must follow in deciding a case.
0 the chief justice.
1 groups that are interested in the outcome of a case, but are not formal litigants.
0 the actual litigants in a case. 

________ opinions are those offered by one or more Supreme Court justices not only tosupport a majority decision, but also to stress a different Constitutional or legal basis for thejudgment.
0 Amicus curiae
0 Dissenting
1 Concurring
0 Adjunct
0 Differential 

A written opinion in a Supreme Court case is a
0 legal argument submitted by an attorney in a case seeking to sway a justice's decision.
0 way of establishing the Court's agenda.
1 statement of the legal reasoning behind a decision.
0 formality handled by the chief justice's law clerks.
0 form of press release written by the chief justice. 


The vast majority of cases reaching the federal courts are settled on the principle of ________,meaning that an earlier ruling should hold for the case being considered.
0 historical authority
1 stare decisis
0 amicus curiae
0 per curiam decision
0 certiorari 

All courts rely heavily upon ________ î€„the way similar cases were handled in the pastî€„as aguide to current decisions.
0 writs of certiorari
0 writs of mandamus
1 precedent
0 original intent
0 amicus curiae 

Stare decisis means that cases are
0 decided using an adversarial system of opposing sides through which the truth hopefully will emerge.
0 decided on the grounds of constitutionality.
0 often used by judges to in effect enact new law and public policy.
1 decided on the basis of precedent.
0 appealable only on procedural grounds not on evidence. 

The Supreme Court ________ overrule is own precedents.
1 can
0 can, but has not tried to
0 will routinely
0 has tried but has failed to
0 cannot 

Judicial ________ refers to how and whether court decisions are translated into real policy,affecting the behavior of others.
0 restraint
0 intent
0 action
0 review
1 implementation 


Which of the following is NOT one of the elements involved in the implementation of judicialdecisions according to the categories noted by Charles Johnson and Bradley Canon?
1 institutionalized population
0 interpreting population
0 consumer population
0 implementing population
0 defining population 



Until the Civil War, the dominant questions before the Supreme Court regarded
0 questions of the relationship between the federal government and the economy.
0 presidential powers.
1 the powers and legitimacy of the federal government.
0 issues of social and political equality and the expansion of the right to vote.
0 the interpretation of First Amendment rights. 

Marbury v. Madison established the principle of
0 Constitutional penumbra.
0 national supremacy.
0 original intent.
1 judicial review.
0 stare decisis. 

Which of the following statements about the Supreme Court case of  Marbury v. Madison isFALSE?
0 The Court established its power to hold acts of Congress in violation of the Constitution.
0 The Court ruled part of the Judiciary Act of 1789 unconstitutional.
1 The Court ruled that Madison was in the right to withhold Marbury's commission.
0 The Court ruled that it had no power to require that Marbury's commission be delivered.
0 none of the above 


The principle of judicial review was first established expressly in writing in the Supreme Courtdecision of
0 United States v. Nixon.
0 McCulloch v. Maryland.
0 Marshall v. United States Congress.
1 Marbury v. Madison.
0 Marshall v. Jefferson. 

During the early New Deal era, the Supreme Court was dominated by conservatives who
0 came to be known as the Bad Deal Five for thwarting New Deal legislation and were impeached and removed as a group by Congress.
1 viewed federal intervention in the economy as unconstitutional, and declared several laws invalid.
0 strongly supported federal intervention in the economy, and voted to uphold all New Deal acts.
0 overturned the precedent of Marbury v. Madison and ruled that the Supreme Court has no power of judicial review.
0 were impeached one by one by Congress. 

The proposal to add justices to the Supreme Court, known as the   court packing plan   tocritics, was made by President ________ who wanted to be able to appoint justices moresympathetic to his philosophy than the   nine old men.  
0 Dwight Eisenhower
0 Harry Truman
1 Franklin Roosevelt
0 Richard Nixon
0 John F. Kennedy 

The president who tried to pack the Supreme Court by increasing its size in order to effect asympathetic majority was
1 Franklin Roosevelt.
0 Harry Truman.
0 Richard Nixon.
0 Dwight Eisenhower.
0 Thomas Jefferson. 

The most liberal court of the modern era has been the
0 Rehnquist Court.
0 Marshall Court.
1 Warren Court.
0 Taft Court.
0 Burger Court. 

One of the most active Supreme Courts in shaping public policy in areas of desegregation andthe rights of the accused was the
1 Warren Court.
0 Rehnquist Court.
0 Marshall Court.
0 Burger Court.
0 Nixon Court. 

Richard Nixon chose ________ as the new chief justice in 1969, hoping with this appointmentto move the Supreme Court toward a more   strict construction   interpretation of theConstitution in its subsequent decisions.
0 John Marshall
0 Nelson Rockefeller
1 Warren Burger
0 Harry Blackmun
0 Earl Warren 


The Rehnquist Court
1 has slowly chipped away at liberal decisions.
0 has been deeply divided between liberals and conservatives, and personality conflicts have added to a court in turmoil.
0 created a revolution in constitutional law.
0 has been a disappointment to conservatives.
0 has gone further to shape public policy than the Warren Court. 

Democratic theorists criticize the courts on the grounds that they are
0 used indiscriminately, leading to legal stagnation.
0 not representative of the victimized upper and upper-middle classes.
1 not representative of the people or majority public opinion.
0 and always have been used to persecute vulnerable minorities.
0 easily swayed by interest-group pressure. 

Studies of Supreme Court decisions found that
0 the Court prefers to base its decisions on the Constitution rather than narrower and more contentious technical grounds.
0 the Court is usually out of line with public opinion.
0 there is no correlation between public opinion and Court decisions.
1 the Court is normally in line with popular majorities.
0 the Court renders fewer decisions in election years. 


The view that judges should play a minimal role in policymaking is called judicial
0 jurisprudence.
1 restraint.
0 precedent.
0 objectivity.
0 neutrality. 

Advocates of ________ emphasize that the courts may alleviate pressing needs, especially ofthose who are weak politically or economically, left unmet by the majoritarian politicalprocess.
1 judicial activism
0 the jurisprudence of original intent
0 judicial restraint
0 judicial implementation
0 judicial review 

The justification used by federal courts primarily to avoid deciding cases regarding conflictsbetween the president and Congress is known as the doctrine of
0 judicial activism.
1 political questions.
0 independent grounds.
0 stare decisis.
0 judicial restraint. 

As a means to avoid deciding some cases, the federal courts have developed a doctrine of
0 judicial precedent.
0 strict constructionism.
0 statutory construction.
0 judicial activism.
1 political questions. 

When given a choice, the courts are least likely to decide a case on the basis of
0 standing.
0 precedent.
1 the Constitution.
0 mootness.
0 jurisdiction. 

How many times has the Supreme Court ruled a federal law unconstitutional?
1 fewer than 200
0 more than 500
0 once
0 never
0 about 1,000 

Cases that involve statutory construction
1 can be overturned by Congress by clarifying an existing law.
0 must be decided according to a strict construction of the Constitution.
0 are usually precedent setting.
0 involve policy issues.
0 can only be changed through a Constitutional amendment. 




Capitalism is
0 an advanced system of stock management.
1 an economic system in which individuals and corporations own the principal means of production.
0 an economic system in which public agencies manage fundamental aspects of monetary policy.
0 an economic system in which the government owns the means of production.
0 an economic system based on the Federal Reserve. 

Conservatives complain about
0 the size of the public sector.
0 excessive regulation of the private sector.
0 the oppressive scope of government.
1 all of the above
0 new legislation limiting corporate power. 

The consumer price index measures
0 the change what various incomes can buy.
0 the change in the amount of taxes paid by individuals.
1 the change in the cost of buying a fixed basket of good and services.
0 the change in income, controlling for periods of unemployment.
0 the change in the prime lending rate. 

Hundreds, if not thousands, of studies by political scientists have concluded that voters
0 ignore the economic consequences of government policies.
0 vote for candidates who promise the most.
0 vote solely on the basis of partisanship alone.
1 vote for the candidate who will benefit the voter's financial condition the most.
0 vote against their personal financial interests. 


Union members, minority group members, and the poor are more likely to vote ________ thanhigher income people are.
0 Republican (due to greater concern about unemployment)
0 Democratic (due to greater concern about both unemployment and inflation)
1 Democratic (due to greater concern about unemployment)
0 Democratic (due to greater concern about inflation)
0 Republican (due to greater concern about inflation) 

Business owners, managers, and professional people are more likely to vote ________ thanlower income people are.
1 Republican (due to greater concern about inflation)
0 Democratic (due to greater concern about unemployment)
0 Democratic (due to greater concern about inflation)
0 Republican (due to greater concern about both inflation and unemployment)
0 Republican (due to greater concern about unemployment) 

The Republican party is more concerned than the Democrats about
0 crime and health problems that are linked to unemployment.
0 high interest rates.
1 inflation than unemployment.
0 staving off a recession.
0 raising the consumer price index. 

The nation's unemployment rate is determined by
0 monthly changes in income tax withholdings monitored by the Internal Revenue Service.
1 a monthly random survey of the population.
0 randomly selected payroll audits by Federal Reserve Board analysts.
0 monthly reports by the unemployment department of each state.
0 monthly reports filed by all employers regarding the number of their employees. 

The ________ conducts a huge statistical survey of the population monthly to measure thenation's unemployment rate.
0 Federal Reserve Board
0 Council of Economic Advisors
1 Bureau of Labor Statistics
0 Census Bureau
0 Office of Management and the Budget 

The official unemployment rate underestimates unemployment because it leaves out
1 discouraged workers.
0 students.
0 housewives.
0 the high-tech sector.
0 the homeless. 

In the 2004 presidential election, people who thought their families were doing better off voted
0 2 to 1 for George W. Bush.
1 4 to 1 for George W. Bush.
0 10 to 1 for George W. Bush.
0 4 to 1 for John Kerry.
0 2 to 1 for John Kerry. 

Inflation was generally highest during the
0 1930s.
1 1970s.
0 1960s.
0 1980s.
0 1990s. 

The principle that the government should not meddle with the economy is known as
0 Keynesian economic theory.
0 caveat emptor.
0 monetarism.
1 laissez faire.
0 conservatism. 

When the stock market crash of 1929 sent unemployment soaring, President Herbert Hoover
0 embraced Keynesian economic theory.
0 experimented with dozens of new federal policies and work projects to put the economy back on track.
0 pushed a massive tax cut through Congress to stimulate the economy.
1 clung to the laissez-faire economic theory.
0 put strict wage, price, and production controls into effect nationwide. 


Who is the current chair of the Federal Reserve Board?
0 Alan Greenspan
1 Ben Bernanke
0 Mike Emmons
0 Ralph Nader
0 Robert Wagner 

________ is the manipulation of the supply of money and credit in private hands to promotethe nation's economic health.
0 Keynesianism
0 Laissez faire
0 Fiscal policy
1 Monetary policy
0 Supply-side policy 


Monetarists want to
0 use government spending and job programs during economic downturns to inject money into the economy.
0 reduce taxes in order to stimulate the growth of the money supply.
1 hold the growth in money supply to equal the rise in the gross national product after inflation.
0 tie the value of the dollar to the value of gold, thus increasing and stabilizing the money supply.
0 keep the government's hands off the economy. 

Monetary policy is directly regulated by
0 the United States Mint.
1 the Federal Reserve System.
0 Congress and the President.
0 the Department of Commerce.
0 the Treasury Department. 

The Federal Reserve System is governed by
1 a seven-member Board of Governors appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate.
0 the director of the Internal Revenue Service.
0 a twelve-member Board of Governors chosen by local bankers in each of the twelve Federal Reserve districts.
0 the President's Council of Economic Advisors.
0 the Secretary of the Treasury, whose name appears on all currency. 

A supporter of laissez-faire policy would oppose
0 supply-side economics.
0 a strict separation between government and business.
1 governmental intervention in the economy.
0 reducing governmental economic regulation.
0 reducing government subsidies of failing businesses. 

Since the New Deal,
1 policymakers have made it part of their regular business to seek to control the economy.
0 the federal government has become less involved in economic policy.
0 the principle of laissez faire has dominated economic policy.
0 economic issues have become less politicized.
0 Keynesian economics has replaced supply-side theory in American fiscal policy. 

The economic theory that considers the supply of money as the key to the nation's economichealth is
0 supply-side economics.
0 currency-reserve theory.
1 monetarism.
0 Keynesian economic theory.
0 laissez-faire capitalism. 

Monetarists emphasize that economic conditions are related to
0 the level of government deficit spending.
0 the value of the dollar in global currency markets.
0 declining productivity.
0 how much money government spends.
1 the supply of money. 

The main agency for making monetary policy is the
0 Office of Management and Budget.
0 United States Treasury.
1 Federal Reserve Board.
0 Congressional Budget Office.
0 Council of Economic Advisors. 

The Federal Reserve Board is intended to be
0 formally under the control of Congress.
0 half Democrat and half Republican.
0 replaced by each new president.
0 formally under the control of the president.
1 independent of partisan politics. 

The Federal Reserve Board regulates
0 antitrust policy.
0 tax and spending policies.
0 the nation's gold reserves and the United States Mint.
0 all United States government bank accounts and investments.
1 the supply of money and credit in the economy. 

An example of the use of monetary policy is
0 instituting a freeze on prices.
1 requiring banks to keep more money on reserve.
0 subsidizing farmers.
0 making low-interest, long-term loans to college students.
0 all of the above 

According to monetarists, making too much money available to borrow may lead to
0 widespread bankruptcies.
0 economic belt-tightening.
1 inflation.
0 recession.
0 too little credit. 

Members of the Federal Reserve System's Board of Governors
0 are subject to replacement by each new president.
1 are given 14-year terms designed to insulate them from political pressures.
0 can be fired by the president at any time.
0 are career civil-servants, neither appointed nor fired by presidents.
0 merely carry out policy decided by the Treasury Department. 

The Federal Reserve System's Board of Governors sets discount rates at a higher level
0 to assist incumbent presidents near election time.
0 thus lowering the cost of money and stimulating borrowing.
0 to combat high unemployment.
0 to increase the amount of money in circulation.
1 to decrease the amount of money in circulation. 

Which of the following is NOT one of the measures used by the Fed to control the moneysupply?
0 It sets discount rates for the money that banks can borrow from the Federal Reserve.
0 It can buy and sell government securities in the market, thereby either expanding or contracting the money supply.
0 It sets reserve requirements that determine the amount of money that banks must keep in reserve at all times.
1 It dictates the minimum prime lending rate by commercial banks.
0 none of the above 

Which of the following is NOT influenced in a major way by the actions of the Fed?
0 money supply
0 inflation
0 commercial interest rates
1 the minimum wage
0 the unemployment rate 

Fiscal policy is
1 taxing, spending, and borrowing decisions shaped mostly by Congress and the president.
0 the manipulation of interest rates by the government to affect economic growth rates.
0 based on the principle that government should not meddle with the economy.
0 the manipulation of the supply of money and credit in private hands.
0 the reduction of taxes in order to stimulate the economy. 

Taxing, spending, and borrowing decisions by Congress and the president are knowncollectively as
1 fiscal policy.
0 econometrics.
0 supply-side economics.
0 monetary policy.
0 laissez faire. 

The most important political action in setting monetary policy is
0 Congress.
0 secretary of the treasury.
0 the president.
1 the Federal Reserve.
0 International Monetary Fund. 

An important tool in fiscal policy is the
0 control of interest rates.
1 level of government spending as indicated in the budget.
0 use of price supports.
0 amount of money banks must keep on deposit.
0 all of the above 

Taxing, spending, and borrowing policies of the federal government are called
1 fiscal policy.
0 tax expenditure policy.
0 apportionment policy.
0 supply-side economics.
0 monetarism. 

Keynesian economic theory argues for
0 the government keeping its hands off the economy.
0 stimulating the economy through manipulating the nation's money supply.
0 stimulating the economy through massive tax cuts and reducing the size of the national government.
1 stimulating the economy through government spending programs.
0 government wage and price controls to control inflation. 

________ encourages government to create jobs for people during times of severeunemployment in order to get money into the hands of consumers and stimulate the entireeconomy.
0 Supply-side economics
0 Industrial policy
0 Laissez faire
0 Monetary policy theory
1 Keynesian economic theory 

The Keynesian economic theory argues that government's role in an economic depressionshould be to
0 reduce demand.
0 lower taxes.
1 increase demand.
0 increase supply.
0 increase the total money supply with lower interest rates. 


The economic theory that would argue that government can spend its way out of a depressionby stimulating the economy through spending is
1 Keynesianism.
0 Marxism.
0 Reaganomics.
0 monetarism.
0 red ink economics. 

Jumping into the business of consumer protection in the 1960s and 1970s, the ________ madenew rules about product labeling, exaggerated product claims, and the use of celebrities inadvertising.
1 Federal Trade Commission
0 Consumer Products Safety Commission
0 Food and Drug Administration
0 Clayton Antitrust Act
0 Consumer Protection Agency 

________, supported by President Reagan, was encouraged by the economist Arthur Laffer.
0 Deficit spending
1 Supply-side economics
0 Keynesian economic theory
0 A strict laissez-faire system
0 Monetarism 


President Reagan's economic policies emphasized
0 balanced budgeting through across-the-board cuts in all categories of government spending.
0 the application of Keynesian economic theory to stimulate or slow the economy through lowering or raising taxes.
1 supply-side economics in which tax cuts and deregulation are designed to free funds for savings and investment.
0 industrial policy which targeted high tech industries for government assistance in helping them develop and compete in international markets.
0 first balancing the budget and then cutting taxes. 

George W. Bush's tax cuts in 2001 were based on
0 stagflation.
0 the Federal funds rate.
1 supply-side economics.
0 Keynesian economics.
0 hyperinflation. 

Major corporate corruption scandals in the 1990s
0 were largely ignored by Congress.
0 were ignored by conservatives.
0 have had few economic effects.
1 followed an era of corporate concentration.
0 resulted in prosecution. 

Since the 1980s big business was particularly characterized by
0 the breakup of many multinational corporations.
1 an increase in corporate mergers.
0 a decline in foreign competition.
0 an increase in government regulation.
0 an increase in ethical concerns. 

The Sherman Act of 1890 was passed as ________ measure.
0 a tariff reform
0 a monetary reform
0 a Civil War reparations
1 an antitrust
0 a pro-labor 


A famous and recent antitrust case pursued by the Clinton administration involved
0 Disney Enterprises.
0 McDonald's.
1 Microsoft.
0 AT&T.
0 none of the above 

Which of the following is NOT true about the Food and Drug Administration?
0 It has the responsibility to ascertain the safety and effectiveness of new drugs before approving them for marketing in America.
0 It has broad regulatory powers over the manufacturing, contents, marketing, and labeling of food and drugs.
1 It has the regulatory power to cap the retail prices of food and drugs and prevent profiteering by food and drug companies.
0 Recent budget cuts have left it overburdened and seriously understaffed.
0 All of these are true. 

The first major consumer protection policy was the
0 Product Safety Act.
1 Food and Drug Act.
0 Environmental Protection Act.
0 Wagner Act.
0 Consumer Credit Protection Act. 

Prior to the New Deal era of the 1930s, the national government
1 usually allied itself with business elites to squelch labor unions.
0 forbade workers from joining unions.
0 actively encouraged workers to join unions.
0 guaranteed collective bargaining rights for those workers who formed a viable union.
0 set long prison terms for anyone convicted of unionization activity. 

The right of American workers to collective bargaining was first guaranteed by the NationalLabor Relations Act, also known as the ________ Act.
0 Taft-Hartley
0 Clayton Antitrust
1 Wagner
0 Roosevelt
0 Hawley-Smoot 

Which of the following is NOT true of the Wagner Act?
1 It gave states the power to adopt right-to-work laws.
0 It stated that the right of workers to collective bargaining was guaranteed by the national government.
0 It represented a sharp break with the government's traditional anti-labor stance.
0 It barred employers from firing or discriminating against a worker who advocates the possibility of unionizing.
0 none of the above 


The agency responsible for protecting the public against false and misleading advertising isthe
0 Food and Drug Administration.
0 Justice Department.
0 Product Safety Commission.
0 Federal Communications Commission.
1 Federal Trade Commission. 

Truth in lending is enforced by the
0 National Labor Relations Board.
1 Federal Trade Commission.
0 Federal Reserve Board.
0 Justice Department.
0 Product Safety Commission. 

The right of workers to collective bargaining is guaranteed by the
0 First Amendment.
0 United States Constitution.
1 National Labor Relations Act.
0 Taft-Hartley Act.
0 Clayton Antitrust Act. 

An employer is forbidden to fire or discriminate against a worker who advocates thepossibility of unionizing under a provision of the
0 Landrum-Griffin Act.
0 Taft-Hartley Act.
0 Clayton Act.
1 Wagner Act.
0 First Amendment. 

The Taft-Hartley Act was aimed at
0 expanding the rights of organized labor.
0 requiring employers to provide basic health insurance for their employees.
0 guaranteeing the right to collective bargaining for the first time in United States history.
0 establishing a minimum wage.
1 limiting certain practices by organized labor. 

Right-to-work laws were permitted by the
0 Clayton Antitrust Act.
0 Wagner Act.
0 National Labor Relations Act.
1 Taft-Hartley Act.
0 Federal Trade Commission. 

Right-to-work laws are supported by
0 union members, but not necessarily organized unions.
0 illegal immigrants.
0 organized labor unions.
1 business management.
0 both organized labor unions and management. 

States were given the right to pass right-to-work laws by the
0 National Labor Relations Act.
0 Supreme Court ruling in Standard Oil v. California.
0 Clayton Antitrust Act.
1 Taft-Hartley Act.
0 Sherman Antitrust Act. 

Right-to-work laws prohibit
0 employers from discriminating against legal aliens in their hiring practices.
0 discrimination in the work place on the basis of race or gender.
1 requirements that workers join a union to hold their jobs.
0 employers from hiring illegal aliens.
0 the formation of labor unions. 

Government regulation affects businesses like Wal-Mart by
0 monitoring stock transactions.
0 affection labor practices such as the minimum wage.
0 regulating working conditions and labor practices.
1 none of the above
0 all of the above (excluding D) 


About ________ of Americans recently reported that they agreed that   success in life is prettymuch determined by forces outside our control.  
0 one-tenth
1 two-thirds
0 three-fourths
0 one-half
0 seven-eighths 

Americans believe strongly that
0 Social Security is a bad policy.
0 government is responsible for social welfare.
0 families are responsible for social welfare.
0 social welfare is a collective good.
1 people should take personal responsibility for themselves. 

Examples of Social Welfare policies include
0 entitlements.
0 means-tested programs.
0 project grants.
1 A and B
0 A and C 

Policies that attempt to provide assistance and support to specific groups in society are called
0 equal opportunity policies.
0 redistributive policies.
1 social welfare policies.
0 tax subsidies.
0 anti-poverty policies. 

Federal spending on social programs ________ spending on the military and homelandsecurity.
0 is slightly less than
0 is about the same as
0 is slightly higher than
1 is substantially higher than
0 is much lower than 

Programs to assist the poor have always been
0 politically popular.
1 controversial.
0 supported at increasingly high levels.
0 provided as entitlements.
0 none of the above 

The government spends more on the ________ than on the ________.
0 military; civilians
0 youth; elderly
0 men; women
1 non poor; poor
0 non citizens; citizens 

The median American household income is approximately
0 $27,000.
0 $32,000.
1 $46,000.
0 $59,000.
0 $60,000. 

Government benefits provided regardless of financial need are called
0 means-tested.
0 transfer payments.
1 entitlements.
0 non-merit benefits.
0 generic expenditures. 

An entitlement program is one
0 to which only a small group of people are entitled.
0 which requires a means test to qualify.
0 guaranteed in the Constitution.
1 which provides benefits regardless of financial need.
0 none of the above 

The distribution of income across segments of the American population is
0 just about even.
0 slightly uneven.
1 highly uneven.
0 impossible to gauge.
0 constantly changing. 

During the 1960s and 1970s, the income distribution in the United States
0 grew more equitable.
0 remained much the same, which is fairly equal.
1 remained much the same, which is fairly unequal.
0 grew more unequal.
0 narrowed considerably. 

During the 1980s and 1990s, income distribution in the United States
0 grew more equitable.
0 remained much the same, which is fairly equal.
0 remained much the same, which is fairly unequal.
1 grew more unequal.
0 narrowed considerably. 

________ is the amount of money owned, including stocks, bonds, bank accounts, cars, houses,and so forth.
0 Income
1 Wealth
0 Taxable income
0 Net earnings
0 Net profit 

Which of the following is TRUE about wealth and income in American society?
1 Wealth is distributed less equally than income.
0 Wealth and income are distributed about the same in society.
0 Income is distributed less equally than wealth.
0 Wealth and income are the same thing.
0 none of the above 

The top one percent of wealth-holders currently possess about ________ of all Americanwealth.
0 one percent
0 one tenth
0 one quarter
1 one third
0 one half 


The distribution of income in the United States
0 makes Americans the richest people on earth.
1 is quite uneven.
0 has shifted since 1950 towards middle -income people.
0 is fairly equal compared to most nations in the world.
0 has shifted notably away from elderly people since 1965. 

Statistics show that the distribution of income among American households was most unequalin
0 1960.
0 1970.
0 1980.
1 1990.
0 1950. 

The amount of money collected between two points of time is called
1 income.
0 wealth.
0 taxes.
0 savings.
0 asset accumulation. 

Which of the following statements about wealth in the United States is FALSE?
0 The top one percent of the wealth-holders currently possess about three percent of all American wealth.
0 The wealth of the richest one percent exceeds the wealth of the bottom 90 percent.
0 There are now over two million millionaires in the world, most in the United States.
1 Between 1979 and 1995, the poorest one-fifth of the population saw their real incomes increase, while the richest one-fifth of the population saw their real incomes decrease.
0 none of the above 


The share of national income earned by various groups in the United States is described by theconcept of
0 the apple pie.
1 income distribution.
0 income relativity.
0 socio-economic stratification.
0 wealth allocation. 

The poverty line is measured by
0 the minimum wage extended on a yearly basis.
1 taking into account what a family would need to spend to maintain an   austere   standard of living.
0 the number of people filing for unemployment benefits.
0 the boundaries of an urban ghetto.
0 proportion of the median income as determined by IRS records. 

The United States Bureau of Census ¹ definition of the poverty line takes into account
0 the earning power of the head of the household and family size.
0 a daily intake of 2,000 calories and half the average hourly wage in the country.
1 what a family would need to spend for an austere standard of living and the size of the family.
0 the earning power of the head of the household and racial composition of the family.
0 all of the above 

To count the poor, the United States Bureau of the Census has established the ________ whichtakes into account what a family would need to spend to maintain an   austere   standard ofliving.
0 culture of poverty
0 urban underclass
1 poverty line
0 relative deprivation index
0 Poverty Index 


One study of American families found that ________ were below the poverty line at least onceduring their lifetimes.
0 nearly one-tenth
0 nearly one-third
1 nearly one-half
0 nearly two-thirds
0 nearly three-quarters 

Compared to the general population, poverty is more common among all of the followingEXCEPT
0 African Americans and Hispanics.
1 the elderly.
0 children.
0 inner city residents.
0 Asian Americans. 

Official poverty counts tend to underestimate poverty because
0 some families refuse to report their income level.
1 some families go in and out of poverty without being counted.
0 they do not include individuals ¹ wealth.
0 the Republicans want it that way.
0 the Democrats want it that way. 

The poverty rate is highest among
1 African Americans.
0 people over 65.
0 Caucasians who live in Appalachia.
0 Hispanics.
0 residents of central cities. 

A ________ tax takes a higher percentage from the incomes of the rich than the poor.
1 progressive
0 proportional
0 regressive
0 relative deprivation
0 flat 

The ________ of poverty refers to the increased concentration of poverty among women.
1 feminization
0 gender-enhancement
0 female-orientation
0   pink  ening
0 sexualization 

Poverty among the elderly declined over the past several decades primarily due to
1 Social Security payments.
0 the booming economy in the 1980s.
0 changing attitudes in society regarding the elderly.
0 the larger proportion of savings held by the elderly.
0 none of the above 

A ________ tax requires the same share from everyone, rich and poor alike.
0 progressive
1 proportional
0 regressive
0 relative deprivation
0 flat 

A ________ tax takes a higher percentage from those with lower incomes, and less from thewealthy.
0 progressive
0 proportional
1 regressive
0 relative deprivation
0 flat 

The federal income tax is an example of a ________ tax.
1 progressive
0 proportional
0 regressive
0 relative deprivation
0 flat 

The best evidence indicates that the overall incidence of taxesî€„local, state, and federalî€„inAmerica is
0 progressive.
1 proportional.
0 regressive.
0 relative deprivation.
0 flat. 

The overall incidence of taxes in America is proportional, because
0 federal, state, and local taxes all tend to be proportional.
0 generally regressive federal taxes are counterbalanced by more progressive state and local taxes.
1 generally regressive state and local taxes are counterbalanced by progressive federal taxes.
0 relative deprivation serves as a counterbalance at each level.
0 federal taxes are proportional. 

Government's main tools for influencing the distribution of income and wealth are
0 equal opportunity and affirmative action programs.
1 income taxation and expenditure policies.
0 extending eligibility for welfare and Medicare benefits.
0 legislating and enforcing economic policies.
0 monetary policy and wage and price controls. 

If the government takes a bigger bite from the income of a rich family than from the income ofa poor family, then the tax system is
1 progressive.
0 proportional.
0 regressive.
0 redistributive.
0 retrogressive. 

If one person earns twice as much as another, but each pays 15 percent of their income intaxes, then the tax system is
0 progressive.
1 proportional.
0 regressive.
0 redistributive.
0 egalitarian. 

If a poor family pays 50 percent of its income in taxes and a rich one 5 percent, then the taxsystem is
0 progressive.
0 proportional.
1 regressive.
0 redistributive.
0 retrogressive. 


The tax that can be used to redistribute income from the rich to the poor is a
0 sales tax.
1 progressive tax.
0 regressive tax.
0 proportional tax.
0 relative deprivation tax. 

A tax that can make the rich richer and the poor poorer is a
0 flat tax.
0 progressive tax.
1 regressive tax.
0 proportional tax.
0 graduated tax. 

The best evidence indicates that the overall incidence of taxes in America is
1 proportional.
0 progressive.
0 regressive.
0 redistributive.
0 relative deprivation. 

The biggest chunk of transfer payments goes to
0 means-tested programs in general.
0 Temporary Aid to Needy Families (TANF) in particular.
0 unmarried black females with children.
1 the elderly and other recipients of social security.
0 foreign aid. 

Food Stamps, low-interest student loans, and Temporary Aid to Needy Families are allexamples of
1 transfer payments.
0 regressive taxes.
0 entitlements.
0 relative deprivation.
0 proportional taxes. 

A transfer payment is one which
0 requires some form of work in exchange for government assistance.
1 provides money from the government's general treasury to those in specific need.
0 is paid in lieu of cash.
0 is not based on need.
0 provides tax credits from the government general treasury to those in need. 

Which of the following is NOT a means-tested program?
0 Medicaid
1 Medicare
0 Food Stamps
0 Aid to Families with Dependent Children
0 none of the above 

Which of the following is an example of an entitlement?
0 Food Stamps
0 Aid to Families with Dependent Children
1 Social Security
0 low-interest college loans
0 Pell Grants 

Transfer payments
1 consist of cash and in-kind benefits from the government.
0 are part of the proposed changes to make taxation more proportional.
0 have significantly redistributed income in America.
0 have the net effect of being regressive.
0 all of the above 

Transfer payments have
0 significantly redistributed income in America.
1 raised many of the poor above the poverty line.
0 created greater income equality.
0 have had virtually no affect on poverty in America.
0 conspicuously bypassed the elderly, while helping many other groups. 

Social Security and Medicare
0 require an income and means test for eligibility.
1 are the largest and most expensive social welfare programs in America.
0 have had little effect on the health and income of older Americans.
0 are voluntary programs aimed specifically at the poor.
0 all of the above 

Which of the following programs receives the most funding?
1 Medicare
0 Medicaid
0 Food Stamps
0 Aid to Families with Dependent Children
0 Supplemental Security Income 

Medicaid provides
0 hospital care for the retired and disabled people covered by Social Security.
0 medical insurance to those over 65 and disabled.
1 medical and hospital aid to the poor on the basis of need through federally assisted state health programs.
0 cash payments to aged, blind, or disabled people whose income is below a certain amount.
0 hospital care for people covered by Social Security. 

According to Martin Gilens, whites ¹ attitudes toward welfare are strongly influenced by
0 whether they had ever personally experienced poverty.
0 their religious beliefs about caring for the poor.
0 their current wealth.
1 whether they viewed African Americans as lazy or not.
0 their educational background. 

The feminization of poverty refers to
1 the high incidence of poverty among unmarried mothers and their children.
0 high poverty levels among the elderly, who tend to be female.
0 higher incarceration rates of women today compared to twenty years ago.
0 higher rates of homelessness among women.
0 the high incidence of poverty among married mothers and their children. 

Means-tested public assistance programs
0 are funded at much higher levels than entitlement programs.
0 were eliminated by President Reagan.
1 were strengthened as a result of Lyndon Johnson's   War on Poverty.  
0 include Medicare, Unemployment Insurance and Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance.
0 were eliminated by President Bush. 

The ________, passed by Congress in 1935, dramatically brought the government into theequation of one generation's obligations to another.
0 Aid to Families with Dependent Children Act
0 Medicaid bill
1 Social Security Act
0 National Direct Student Loan Act
0 Medicare Bill 

Social Security was begun in the United States during
0 the Civil War.
0 World War I.
1 the New Deal.
0 the Great Society era.
0 Spanish American War. 

The Social Security Act of 1935
1 brought government into the equation of the obligations of one generation to another.
0 substantially freed adults from the obligation of caring for both their children and parents.
0 provided for free medical care for all citizens over the age of 65 until it was repealed by the Republican congress of 1953.
0 freed American citizens from the obligation of supporting the poor.
0 substantially freed children and adults from paying their parents ¹ medical expenses. 

The   War on Poverty   was the set of social welfare policy initiatives begun by President
1 Lyndon Johnson.
0 Jimmy Carter.
0 Franklin D. Roosevelt.
0 Ronald Reagan.
0 Harry S. Truman. 

The   War on Poverty   programs were later attacked and had their funding reducedsubstantially by President
0 Dwight Eisenhower.
0 Lyndon Johnson.
1 Ronald Reagan.
0 Richard Nixon.
0 George Bush. 

Which of the following presidents did not accept or expand many of the programs initiatedunder Johnson's   War on Poverty  ?
0 Richard Nixon
0 Gerald Ford
0 Jimmy Carter
1 Ronald Reagan
0 both Nixon and Reagan 

President Ronald Reagan ________ the   War on Poverty   programs.
0 was the mastermind behind the passage of
0 continued to support
1 severely reduced many of
0 completely abolished
0 enhanced the scope of 

Charles Murray's evaluation of the Great Society programs concluded they
0 helped to curb the spread of poverty and made the situation much better for millions of the nation's poor.
0 helped to curb the spread of poverty, but did not make the situation any better for the nation's poor.
0 helped to curb the spread of poverty, but actually made the situation worse for the nation's poor.
1 did not curb the spread of poverty, and actually increased the number of the nation's poor.
0 did not curb the spread of poverty, but strengthened the family as a social institution. 

Charles Murray's study of the programs of the Great Society concluded all of the followingEXCEPT
1 a key problem all along was inadequate funding to see the anti -poverty programs through.
0 public policies discouraged the poor from solving their own problems.
0 the programs actually made it profitable to be poor and victimized.
0 many of the programs not only failed to halt the spread of poverty, they actually made matters worse.
0 many of the programs actually increase poverty in the U.S. 


According to Charles Murray, the problem with social welfare policies is that they
0 cost too much.
0 did not receive adequate funding.
1 discouraged the poor from solving their own problems.
0 did not address the basic problem of racism as a cause of poverty.
0 robbed hard-working Peter to pay lazy Paul. 

Criticisms of the current welfare system include each of the following EXCEPT
0 they discourage the poor from solving their problems.
0 they make it profitable to be poor and victimized.
1 they do not include a means test to weed out welfare fraud.
0 they discourage poor people from saving money.
0 they discourage recipients from getting married or even living together. 

Martin Gilens research suggested that Americans ¹ opposition to welfare was based on
0 economic self-interest.
0 conservative political ideology.
1 negative attitudes toward blacks.
0 negative attitudes toward the poor.
0 negative attitudes toward government. 

Each of the following were provisions of the 1996 welfare reform bill EXCEPT
0 each state would receive a fixed amount of money to run its own welfare programs.
0 people on welfare would have to find work within two years or lose all their benefits.
1 basic health care benefits would be provided to those who found jobs.
0 a lifetime maximum of five years on welfare was set.
0 All of the above were provisional the 1996 welfare reform bill. 

Nationally, over the past six decades, there has been a particularly strong redistribution ofgovernment benefits in favor of the
0 very wealthy.
0 corporations.
0 nation's children.
1 elderly.
0 middle class. 

Compared to other industrialized countries, the United States ________ in providing a safetynet for all its citizens and in lifting a greater percentage of the poor above the poverty line withvarious programs.
0 does much better
0 does somewhat better
0 does about the same
1 does worse
0 does something similar 

The United States differs from other industrial countries in regard to social welfare in all of thefollowing ways EXCEPT
0 the United States does not have a comprehensive family leave policy.
0 Americans tend to see poverty and social welfare needs as individual rather than government concerns.
0 Europeans tend to see government in a more positive light, while Americans tend to distrust government action.
1 only the Scandinavian countries spend a smaller proportion of their gross national products on social welfare policies than does the United States.
0 the universal provision of daycare to toddlers, paid for by the government. 

Compared to most Western democracies, the United States provides
1 relatively few social welfare benefits.
0 selective rather than universal social welfare payments.
0 an average amount of social welfare benefits.
0 more cash transfers, but fewer in-kind transfers.
0 overly generous social welfare benefits. 




Overall, about ________ of the Gross Domestic Product goes to the health industry.
0 20 percent
1 15 percent
0 25 percent
0 40 percent
0 8 percent 

Compared to Western European nations, the United States has a ________ infant mortalityrate.
1 higher
0 nearly identical
0 slightly lower
0 significantly lower
0 faster growing 

Which of the following countries has the highest infant mortality rate?
1 United States
0 France
0 Japan
0 Italy
0 Canada 

Health care in the United States
0 has decreased in cost due to the technological revolution.
1 constitutes nearly 15 percent of America's gross domestic product.
0 has made the United States the healthiest country in the world.
0 has failed to keep up with the technological revolution.
0 All of the above 

Which of the following countries has the lowest life expectancy?
0 Italy
0 Japan
1 United States
0 Canada
0 France 

Which of the following is a reason that American health care expenses are so high?
0 Americans visit the doctor more often.
0 Americans have longer hospital stays.
0 Doctors practice   offensive medicine   to avoid medical liability.
1 High-tech care is available for previously untreatable conditions.
0 All of the above. 

Americans have ________ health care.
1 high-tech, expensive, and unequal
0 low-tech, inexpensive, and unequal
0 high-tech, expensive, and equal
0 low-tech, expensive, and unequal
0 high tech, inexpensive and equal 

The infant mortality rate in the United States
0 is the lowest in the world.
0 is second lowest in the world after Japan.
1 ranks 18th among the world's nations.
0 is only worse than Finland, Japan, and Iceland.
0 is half of what it is in Japan. 

Which of the following contributes to higher costs of medical care in the United States?
0 The best doctors tend to practice abroad where insurance premiums are lower.
0 Americans are the healthiest people in the world.
1 Insured patients have little incentive to ask for cheaper care.
0 Malpractice insurance costs for doctors are covered by the federal government.
0 None of the above 

Doctors have no reason to compete with each other to offer cheaper health care expensesbecause
1 insurance companies and government pay for most health care expenses.
0 government mandates that everyone receives equal access to health care.
0 technology has made medical care more efficient and less costly.
0 specialization has made competition unnecessary.
0 All of the above 

Access to health insurance in the United States is strongly related to
0 race and geographic location.
0 gender and income.
1 race and income.
0 gender and geographic location.
0 race and gender. 

________ is part of the Social Security system and covers 40 million American seniors withhospitalization insurance and other optional health insurance.
0 Medicaid
1 Medicare
0 The National Institutes of Health
0 The Superfund
0 The United States Health Service 

In the United States, the largest single source of health care dollars comes from
0 private insurance companies.
0 private charities.
1 government.
0 citizens themselves in out-of-pocket medical payments.
0 the private sector. 

The United States government finances much of the medical research done in the countrythrough
0 Medicaid.
0 the National Endowment for Medical Research.
1 the National Institutes of Health.
0 the National Science Foundation.
0 the Department of Health and Human Services. 

The National Institutes of Health
0 administers the national health insurance system in the United States.
1 provides funds for medical research in the United States.
0 is the largest hospital and physicians ¹ interest group in the United States.
0 administers the Medicare and Medicaid programs.
0 is the federal agency that regulates private health insurance companies. 

Americans pay about ________ of their health care costs out of their own pockets.
0 4 percent
1 20 percent
0 40 percent
0 33 percent
0 54 percent 

Medicare was adopted in 1965 to provide government health insurance to
0 veterans.
0 government employees.
0 the poor.
1 the elderly.
0 children living in poverty. 

The first president to call for national health insurance was
0 Franklin Roosevelt.
1 Harry Truman.
0 Lyndon Johnson.
0 Jimmy Carter.
0 Bill Clinton. 

The federal program that permits older Americans to purchase inexpensive coverage fordoctor fees and other non-hospital expenses is
0 Medicare Part A.
1 Medicare Part B.
0 Medicaid.
0 social insurance program.
0 the American Association of Retired Persons. 

Medicaid is a program designed to provide health care for
1 the very poor.
0 the elderly.
0 everyone who lives below the poverty line.
0 veterans.
0 Social Security recipients. 

Which of the following is NOT true about Medicaid?
0 It is funded by both the states and national government.
0 It is a means-tested program.
1 It provides health care for all poor Americans.
0 The costs of Medicaid are increasing rapidly.
0 States have cut Medicaid coverage in recent years. 

What is the largest voluntary association in the world?
1 American Association of Retired Persons
0 Sierra Club
0 International Association of Workers and Peasants
0 National Patients ¹ Union
0 Chinese Revolutionary Workers ¹ Party 

Which of the following statements about the American Association of Retired Persons isFALSE?
0 It is the largest voluntary association in the world.
0 It can claim to represent one American in eight.
1 Its widespread respect and authority are due to the fact that it has avoided involvement in political activity.
0 It speaks with authority on all questions associated with the elderly.
0 Its membership has been growing dramatically. 

Business groups are becoming increasingly active in health care policymaking because
0 businesses contribute the most taxes that pay for Medicare and Medicaid.
0 businesses are run primarily by elderly Americans who have a vested interest in health care.
0 healthy employees are more profitable to businesses.
1 private employers often pay the insurance premiums for their employees.
0 all of the above 

The primary focus of President Clinton's Health Security Act was
0 fraud on the part of insurance companies.
0 rationing and access.
0 the establishment of national health insurance.
1 providing health care for all Americans.
0 the elderly. 

Under Bill Clinton's proposed Health Security Act, the brunt of the increased health care costswould have fallen most directly on
1 employers.
0 employees.
0 those who purchased tobacco, alcohol, and pornography.
0 patients.
0 doctors. 

George W. Bush's proposal for lowering medical costs by encouraging health savings accountscan best be described as
0 socialist.
0 popular.
0 cheap.
1 market based.
0 egalitarian. 

Which aspect of health care costs has increased the fastest?
0 emergency room care
1 prescription drugs
0 prenatal care
0 out-patient surgery
0 treatment for drug and alcohol abuse 

Of the following, who can not be considered a strong advocate for stem cell research?
1 George W. Bush
0 Michael J. Fox
0 Nancy Reagan
0 Christopher Reeve
0 the State of California 

Oregon started rationing health care provided under Medicaid by
1 deciding not to pay for some costly treatments in order to provide medical care to more people.
0 moving toward greater high-tech breakthroughs in medicine.
0 giving everyone a certain number of health care   credits,   which they can spend annually as they see fit.
0 requiring Medicaid recipients to stop bearing children in order to receive free health coverage for their present families.
0 distributing Medicare patients to a greater number of physicians. 

The enforcement of the Clean Air Act and other anti-pollution legislation is administered bywhat regulatory body?
0 Department of Interior
1 Environmental Protection Agency
0 Department of Justice
0 Occupational Safety and Health Administration
0 Federal Pollution Board 

Which of the following is NOT true about the Environmental Protection Agency?
0 It is the nation's largest regulatory agency.
0 It is in charge of administering policies dealing with toxic wastes such as dangerous chemicals.
0 It enforces the Clean Air Act, the Water Pollution Control Act, and many other environmental bills.
1 It was established in the 1910s.
0 The head of the EPA is a cabinet member. 

The National Environmental Policy Act, the Clean Air Act, and the Water Pollution ControlAct are implemented by the
0 Department of the Interior (DOI).
0 Department of Transportation (DOT).
1 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
0 Department of Energy (DOE).
0 President's National Environmental Council. 

The Clean Air Act of 1970
0 banned cigarette advertisements on television.
0 empowered the Department of Interior with enforcing tough anti -pollution laws on industries near national forests or national parks.
1 empowered the Department of Transportation to authorize mandatory reductions in automobile emissions.
0 never passed Congress due to economic concerns about its effect.
0 banned cigarette smoking in public buildings. 

The smaller size of American cars, the use of unleaded gasoline, and the lower gasconsumption of new cars are all due in large part to
0 self-regulation of the automobile industry.
0 Supreme Court rulings.
1 Department of Transportation regulations.
0 consumer demands.
0 the dramatic increases of Middle Eastern oil prices in the 1970s. 

Auto companies have been partially successful in their efforts to delay implementation of
1 clean air standards.
0 mandatory air bag requirements.
0 oil price deregulation.
0 the National Environmental Policy Act.
0 auto safety legislation. 

The Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 has successfully
1 improved the water quality of the Great Lakes and northeastern rivers.
0 chlorinated the water systems of nearly every major city.
0 abolished ocean dumping.
0 banned all oil drilling in off-shore rigs.
0 all of the above 

About ________ of the United States is now designated as protected wilderness.
1 4 percent
0 12 percent
0 24 percent
0 35 percent
0 17 percent 

Half of the designated wilderness area in the United States is located in
1 Alaska.
0 New England.
0 Texas.
0 California.
0 the Rocky Mountains. 

Perhaps the most consistently successful environmental campaigns in the post -war era havebeen those aimed at
0 air pollution.
1 wilderness preservation.
0 water pollution.
0 energy conservation.
0 toxic waste cleanup. 

The Endangered Species Act of 1973, as originally passed, required that the government
0 choose which species were significant enough to protect from extinction, while others would be allowed to die off.
0 merely acknowledge that some species were likely to go extinct.
1 actively protect each of the hundreds of species listed as endangered, regardless of the economic effect on the surrounding region.
0 actively protect each of the hundreds of species listed as endangered unless that protection would cause severe economic harm to the local region.
0 none of the above 

The Superfund is paid for by
0 a voluntary check-off system on federal income tax forms.
1 taxes on chemical products.
0 a special tax on automobiles, trucks, snowmobiles, and motorized farm vehicles.
0 the federal gasoline tax.
0 aviation fuel taxes. 

Which of the following is NOT true about Superfund?
0 Taxes on chemical products are used to pay for it.
1 It has successfully located and isolated the country's toxic waste dump sites and has completely cleaned more than half of those sites.
0 It was created by Congress in part to respond to the Love Canal disaster in New York state.
0 Its costs represent the fastest growing segment of the nation's environmental budget.
0 It is administered by the EPA. 

The Superfund was created to
1 clean up toxic waste.
0 preserve endangered species.
0 buy land for wilderness protection.
0 finance the national park system.
0 all of the above 


To successfully dispose of nuclear wastes, they must be isolated from the environment for________ years.
0 10
0 100
0 1,000
0 5,000
1 10,000 

A large number of legal suits currently involve conflicts over who will pay to
0 protect endangered species.
0 fund environmental research.
1 clean up radioactive wastes.
0 administer wilderness preserves.
0 purchase new wilderness lands. 

After more than a decade of political delays, President Bush in 2002 signed off onCongressional legislation choosing Yucca Flats, Nevada, as the
0  official location of the Superfund.
0  new office location of the EPA.
0  only remaining pristine wilderness in the United States.
1 site for the long-term storage of nuclear waste.
0 site for the destruction of nuclear weapons. 

An estimated 90 percent of the energy resources of the United States is in
0 oil reserves.
1 coal deposits.
0 natural gas reserves.
0 uranium deposits.
0 water. 

America's coal deposits are expected to last
0 15 more years.
0 50 more years.
1 for hundreds of years.
0 for thousands of years.
0 forever, as coal is a renewable resource. 

Which of the following is NOT true of coal?
0 It is the nation's most abundant fuel.
0 It is responsible for the   black lungs   health hazard to coal miners.
1 It accounts for half the energy Americans use.
0 Its use to produce electricity is linked to acid rain.
0 About 90 percent of all of America's energy resources are in coal. 

The   dirtiest   type of fuel is
1 coal.
0 oil.
0 natural gas.
0 nuclear fuel.
0 wood. 

The most controversial energy source is
0 coal.
0 oil.
0 natural gas.
1 nuclear fuel.
0 solar. 

Global warming refers to
0 the expectation that the Earth's atmosphere is becoming warmer due to the decreasing size of ice masses in Antarctica.
0 the expectation that the world will share a common weather pattern by the year 2010.
1 the expectation that the Earth's atmosphere is becoming warmer due to high levels of carbon monoxide production.
0 the spread of nuclear power throughout the world.
0 the melting of the polar ice caps. 

At the end of 1997, 150 nations met in Kyoto, Japan, and agreed in principle to
0 stop producing carbon monoxide.
1 reduce their emissions of greenhouse gases below 1990 levels by about 2010.
0 increase their reliance on renewable resources by 200 percent of their 1990 levels.
0 offer tax incentives for reducing carbon monoxide production.
0 stop using nuclear energy. 

Which of the following is a renewable resource?
0 coal
1 solar energy
0 natural gas
0 oil
0 nuclear 



All of the following are instruments of foreign policy EXCEPT
1 taxation.
0 military.
0 economic.
0 diplomacy.
0 none of the above 

Diplomacy refers to
1 formal and informal communications with representatives of other governments.
0 regulation of international travel.
0 the exchange of military officials between countries.
0 a recent philosophy regarding world relations.
0 multi-sided arms negotiations. 

The United Nations was created in
0 1789.
0 1865.
1 1945.
0 1967.
0 1919. 

Member countries of the United Nations agree to
1 renounce war and respect certain human and economic freedoms.
0 elect their leaders through the democratic process.
0 adopt the United States Constitution as their model for self-government.
0 limit the organization's activities to a peacekeeping function, and not involve themselves in economic development or health, education, and welfare concerns.
0 adopt capitalist economic systems. 

The United Nations General Assembly is made up of about ________ members.
0 15
0 60
1 185
0 320
0 144 

The ________ is the real focus of power in the United Nations.
0 General Assembly
0 Foreign Relations Committee
0 Secretariat
1 Security Council
0 Secretary General 

The United Nations Security Council has ________ members.
0 5
1 15
0 35
0 175
0 100 

On the United Nations Security Council, ________ countries have permanent seats.
0 no
0 2
1 5
0 15
0 9 

Which of the following is NOT a permanent member country on the United Nations SecurityCouncil?
1 Japan
0 Great Britain
0 China
0 France
0 Russia 

The United Nations is composed of nearly 200
0 civil servants.
0 diplomats.
0 nations and international organizations.
1 nations.
0 regional caucuses. 

New actors on the world stage include all of the following EXCEPT
0 international organizations.
0 non-governmental organizations.
0 multinational corporations.
1 diplomats.
0 tourists. 

The European Union is an example of a ________ organization.
0 nongovernmental
0 domestic
0 military
0 diplomatic
1 regional 

Regional organizations have ________ in the post -World War II era.
0 declined in number
0 decreased in influence
1 proliferated
0 disappeared
0 remained active 

Permanent members of the United Nations Security Council have
1 veto power over any Security Council decisions, including any effort to deploy UN peacekeeping troops.
0 two votes each on the Security Council, making them more important than non-permanent members.
0 no more or no less clout on the Security Council than the non-permanent members, just guaranteed membership.
0 no voting power on the Security Council, but are guaranteed the right to listen in or speak at any meeting.
0 none of the above 

After the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the United Nations
0 sided with Iraq, but many countries refused to go along.
1 authorized an embargo on the shipment of goods into and out of Iraq, then authorized the use of force against Iraq.
0 authorized an embargo on the shipment of goods into and out of Iraq, but would not authorize the use of military force.
0 remained a neutral ground for diplomacy, siding neither with nor against Iraq's actions, but calling for a peaceful resolution.
0 sided with Iraq. 

The seat of real power in the United Nations is the
0 General Assembly.
1 Security Council.
0 World Bank.
0 Superpower Caucus.
0 Secretariat. 

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization is an example of a
0 United Nations agency.
1 regional organization for military purposes.
0 regional organization for economic purposes.
0 multinational corporation.
0 global organization for military purposes. 

During the Cold War era, the Soviet Union and its Eastern European allies formed a regionalorganization known as the
0 Iron Curtain.
0 European Economic Community.
0 Trilateral Commission.
1 Warsaw Pact.
0 Geneva Convention. 

During the Cold War era, more than a million ________ troops were spread from WestGermany to Portugal.
1 North Atlantic Treaty Organization
0 Trilateral Commission
0 German
0 United Nations peacekeeping
0 United Nations combat 

The ________ is a regional economic organization of major nations.
0 North Atlantic Treaty Organization
0 Warsaw Pact
1 European Union
0 Trilateral Commission
0 Geneva Convention 

Multinational corporations
1 have been known to link forces with the CIA to overturn governments they disliked.
0 are usually strictly regulated by their host country.
0 are among the oldest actors on the international stage.
0 contribute two-thirds of the world's industrial output.
0 all of the above 

An example of an interest group involved in international affairs would be
0 the World Bank.
0 the European Economic Community.
1 Greenpeace.
0 tourists.
0 immigrants. 

As chief diplomat, the president does all of the following EXCEPT
0 negotiates treaties.
0 deploys troops abroad.
1 entertains foreign heads of state.
0 appoints United States ambassadors.
0 none of the above 

The ________ is the primary foreign policy arm of the United States government.
1 State Department
0 Department of Defense
0 Joint Chiefs of Staff
0 National Security Council
0 Central Intelligence Agency 

After the president, the ________ is considered the nation's foremost diplomat in the UnitedStates.
0 National Security Adviser
1 Secretary of State
0 Secretary of Defense
0 United States Ambassador to the United Nations
0 chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 

The ________ staffs United States embassies and consulates in about 300 overseas posts fromAlbania to Zimbabwe, representing the interests of Americans.
0 Department of Defense
0 Justice Department
1 State Department
0 National Security Council
0 Executive Office of the President 

The head of the foreign policy arm of the federal government who traditionally advises thepresident is the
0 National Security Assistant.
0 Secretary of Defense.
1 Secretary of State.
0 United States Ambassador to the United Nations.
0 chair of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. 

Many recent presidents have bypassed the Secretary of State for foreign policy advice andcome to rely more on the
0 Secretary of Defense.
0 United States Ambassador to the United Nations.
0 Joint Chiefs of Staff.
1 special assistant for National Security Affairs.
0 National Security Council. 

  The Pentagon   refers to the
0 State Department.
0 Foreign Service.
0 Joint Chiefs of Staff.
1 Department of Defense.
0 Department of Homeland Security. 

The commanding officers of each of the services, plus a chair, constitute the
0 Armed Services Committee.
0 National Security Council.
1 Joint Chiefs of Staff.
0 Department of Defense.
0 Central Intelligence Agency. 

The president's principal civilian adviser on the military is the
0 National Security Adviser.
0 Secretary of State.
1 Secretary of Defense.
0 chair of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
0 director of the Central Intelligence Agency. 

The chief role of the Secretary of Defense is to
1 manage the military budget.
0 be the president's chief foreign policy advisor.
0 coordinate American foreign and military policy.
0 act as Commander in Chief of the armed forces.
0 declare war. 

The National Security Council is officially composed of the president and all of the followingEXCEPT the
1 director of the Central Intelligence Agency.
0 Secretary of Defense.
0 Secretary of State.
0 vice president.
0 Secretary of Homeland Security. 

The ________ is officially composed of the president, the vice president, the Secretary ofDefense and the Secretary of State.
0 National Security Agency
0 Pentagon
0 Joint Chiefs of Staff
1 National Security Council
0 Trilateral Commission 

The ________ was formed in 1947 to coordinate American foreign and military policies andadvise the president.
0 State Department
0 Department of Defense
0 Joint Chiefs of Staff
1 National Security Council
0 Central Intelligence Agency 

The Iran-Contra affair erupted in 1986 when it came to light that members of the ________were involved in a secret operation selling arms to Iran in return for Iranian help in returningAmerican hostages held in Lebanon, and using money from the arms sale to fund rebels inNicaragua.
0 Joint Chiefs of Staff
1 National Security Council staff
0 Department of Defense
0 State Department
0 Central Intelligence Agency 

The government body responsible for coordinating foreign and military policy is the
1 National Security Council.
0 Joint Chiefs of Staff.
0 Central Intelligence Agency.
0 State Department.
0 Department of Defense. 

The Iran-Contra affair involved covert activities staged by the
0 State Department.
1 National Security Council.
0 Pentagon.
0 Central Intelligence Agency.
0 Joint Chiefs of Staff. 

Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North became a national celebrity when he explained hisinvolvement in the ________ to a televised Congressional hearing.
1 Iran-Contra scandal
0 Watergate scandal
0 defense procurement scandal
0 liberation of Kuwait
0 Whitewater scandal 

The ________ was established after World War II in order to coordinate American informationand data-gathering operations abroad and to collect, analyze, and evaluate its own data.
0 OSS
1 CIA
0 JCS
0 National Security Council
0 North Atlantic Treaty Organization 

Which of the following statements about the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) is FALSE?
0 The CIA was created after World War II to coordinate American information and intelligence activities abroad.
0 The bulk of the material gathered and analyzed by the CIA comes from readily available sources.
1 The CIA has never been involved in domestic affairs.
0 Congress requires the CIA to inform relevant Congressional committees of current and anticipated covert operations.
0 It was involved in the overthrow of the Iranian government. 

The ________ helped to overthrow the governments of Iran in 1953 and Guatemala in 1954,and has a long history of involvement in the internal affairs of other nations.
0 Department of Defense
0 National Security Council
1 Central Intelligence Agency
0 Joint Chiefs of Staff
0 Federal Bureau of Investigation 

The Central Intelligence Agency is required by law to report its activities to
1 relevant Congressional committees.
0 the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
0 the United Nations Security Council.
0 the Secretary of State.
0 no one, not even the president. 

A study by Richard Betts showed that the advice given to the president by the Joint Chiefs ofStaff tends to
0 be split, with the Army and Marine Corps favoring aggressive policies and the Navy favoring peaceful policies.
0 favor aggressive solutions to crises.
1 be no more aggressive than advice given by civilian advisors.
0 be ignored by the president who listens mainly to the national security advisor.
0 favor the use of nuclear weapons. 


Which of the following is NOT true about the Central Intelligence Agency?
0 Its precise budget and most of its staff are kept secret.
0 Much of its business is collecting basic information from newspapers and government reports in foreign cities.
0 It has helped overthrow foreign governments through successful espionage.
1 Due to its need for secrecy, it does not have to report to any congressional committee.
0 The head of the CIA is a member of the president's National Security Council. 

Which of the following is NOT a power of Congress in foreign and defense policy?
0 to declare war
0 to ratify treaties
1 to appoint ambassadors
0 to confirm presidential nominees to head the State Department and Department of Defense
0 to provide oversight of the CIA 

The foreign-policy powers of Congress
0 have no constitutional basis.
1 include raising and organizing the armed forces.
0 include making treaties.
0 are negligible when compared with the president's.
0 appoint the top military officials including the Joint Chiefs of Staff. 

Throughout most of American history, American foreign policy has centered on the concept of
1 isolationism.
0 brinkmanship.
0 containment.
0 McCarthyism.
0 internationalism. 

The Monroe Doctrine
0 ended the American policy of isolationism.
1 showed again that America was not concerned with Europe's problems.
0 affirmed America's intention to stay out of Latin American affairs.
0 symbolized the start of the Cold War.
0 first enunciated the policy of isolationism. 

Throughout most of its history up to the early twentieth century, the United States followed aforeign policy course of ________, particularly with regard to Europe.
1 isolationism
0 internationalism
0 intervention
0 collective security
0 laissez faire 

It was, above all else, ________ that dealt a death blow to American isolationism.
0 World War I
1 World War II
0 the Cuban Missile Crisis
0 the Vietnam War
0 World War III 

The death-blow to American isolationism occurred as a result of
0 the Monroe Doctrine.
0 World War I.
1 World War II.
0 the League of Nations.
0 the Soviet takeover of Eastern Europe. 

The containment doctrine did not prevent the communists from winning a stunning victory in________ in 1949.
0 Turkey
0 West Berlin
1 China
0 Taiwan
0 Vietnam 

America's principal foreign policy strategy toward the Soviet Union throughout the Cold War,proposed by the foreign policy strategist George Kennan in 1947, was
0 isolationism.
1 containment.
0 peaceful coexistence.
0 covert operations.
0 laissez faire. 

The Marshall Plan
0 warned European nations to stay out of Latin America.
1 poured billions of dollars into war-ravaged European nations after World War II.
0 established the containment doctrine.
0 imposed democratic constitutions on Germany and Japan in the wake of World War II.
0 created NATO. 

The containment doctrine was
1 intended to prevent Soviet expansion after World War II.
0 the policy of nuclear arms agreements to limit the spread of nuclear weapons.
0 the Soviet policy of building the Iron Curtain and Berlin Wall to hold American influence to Western Europe after World War II.
0 first proposed as a military maneuver during the Korean War as a means to prevent Chinese advances.
0 the policy of cooperation and relaxation of tensions with the Soviet Union. 

Almost immediately following World War II, the United States entered into ________ with theSoviet Union.
0 the Korean War
0 the Cuban Missile Crisis
1 a Cold War
0 peaceful coexistence
0 a lend lease plan 

During the 1950s, John Foster Dulles, the Secretary of State under Eisenhower, proclaimed apolicy of ________ in America's dealings with the Soviet Union.
0 containment Â´
0 detente
0 peaceful coexistence
1 brinkmanship
0 laissez faire 

Fear of a serious communist conspiracy in the United States during the early years of the ColdWar led to the rise of a near panic that communism was infiltrating American government andcultural institutions, and became known as
0 brinkmanship.
1 McCarthyism. Â´
0 detente.
0 isolationism.
0 the Deep Freeze. 

McCarthyism was strongest during
0 World War II.
0 the Vietnam War.
1 the Korean War. Â´
0 detente.
0 World War I. 


The cold war led to all of the following EXCEPT
0 an arms race between the United States and the Soviet Union.
1 the use of atomic weapons.
0 the growth of the military-industrial complex.
0 mutual assured destruction.
0 none of the above 

The growth of the military budget during the 1950s under President Eisenhower led him toremark at the end of his second term that
0 although the Soviets were not aware of it yet, the United States had won the Cold War.
0 atomic bombs should be dropped on the Soviet Union.
1 the military-industrial complex that had developed between private defense contractors and the Pentagon was worrisome.
0 due to the Soviet launching of the Sputnik satellite, peaceful coexistence between the superpowers was over.
0 none of the above 

By the mid-1950s, defense expenditures
0 declined below World War II levels.
0 gave way to expenditures on social-welfare policies.
1 grew to be the largest component of the federal budget.
0 reduced the profits of defense contractors.
0 shifted to the Middle East to protect American oil supplies. 



The rise of detente and the first Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT) were brought aboutunder President
0 Harry Truman.
0 Dwight Eisenhower.
0 Ronald Reagan.
1 Richard Nixon.
0 John F. Kennedy. 

The relaxation of tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union throughout the1970s was known asÂ´
1 detente.
0 containment.
0 the Strategic Defense Initiative.
0 glasnost.
0 New Thinking. 


In detente,
0 nuclear rearmament was emphasized.
1 diplomacy and propaganda replaced the threat of force.
0 unilateral arms reductions were common.
0 international relations shifted from a multipolar to a bipolar world.
0 international relations shifted from a bipolar to a multipolar world. 

A product of detente was the
0 end of the Korean War.
1 start of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks.
0 1979 Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty.
0 creation of the United Nations.
0 all of the above 

The United States and Soviet Union agreement on SALT I reflected
0 a policy of containment.
0 brinkmanship. Â´
1 a policy of detente.
0 McCarthyism.
0 the two nations ¹ first effort to coordinate the development of a natural resource. 

The largest increase in peacetime defense spending occurred under President ________, whoargued that the Soviets had used arms control agreements to gallop ahead of the United Statesin military spending.
0 Gerald Ford
0 Jimmy Carter
0 Richard Nixon
1 Ronald Reagan
0 Harry Truman 

President Ronald Reagan proposed a massive new spending program called the ________ tocreate a global umbrella in space, wherein computers would scan the skies and use varioushigh-tech devices to destroy invading missiles.
0 brinkmanship
0 Superpatriot Missile Shield
1 Strategic Defense Initiative
0 Anti-Ballistic Missile System
0 Early Warning System 

During the early years of his administration, Reagan's foreign and defense policiesemphasizedÂ´
0 detente.
1 anticommunism.
0 arms reduction talks.
0 nuclear disarmament.
0 international free trade agreements. 


The cold war ended
1 spontaneously with freedom and self-determination erupting in Eastern Europe.
0 with the signing of the East-West Corollaries in 1993.
0 with the American occupation of Eastern Europe in 1945.
0 shortly after Chinese students held peaceful protests for democracy in Tiananmen Square.
0 with Iraq's defeat in Kuwait in 1991. 


One of the few spots where violence and brutal government force crushed a pro-democracyreform movement in 1989 and allowed the communist government to endure was inTiananmen Square in
0 Warsaw.
1 Beijing.
0 Prague.
0 Quito.
0 Ho Chi Minh City. 

The use of violence to demoralize and frighten a country's population or government isreferred to as
0 isolationism. Â´
0 detente.
0 mutual assured destruction.
1 terrorism.
0 psychological warfare. 

In response to the terrorist acts of September 11, 2001, the George W. Bush administration hasdeveloped a new foreign policy emphasizing
0 negotiation.
0 deterrence. Â´
0 detente.
1 preemptive strikes.
0 diplomacy. 

What errors did the United States make in planning post-war Iraq?
0 The U.S. believed that the American soldiers would be welcomed as liberators.
0 The U.S. believed that Iraqi oil revenues would pay for most reconstruction costs.
0 The U.S. believed Iraqis had the skill and infrastructure to do most of the rebuilding.
1 all of the above
0 none of the above 

The Unites States originally pursued a   decapitation   strategy for confronting al -Qaida. Whatdid this strategy propose to do?
0 attack the root causes of terrorism, namely poverty
0 reduce America's cultural influence on the Muslim world
1 eliminate a small number of al-Qaida leaders
0 execute publicly all al-Qaida members by way of the guillotine
0 spread democracy to the Middle East 

The threat posed by terrorist groups and the hostile states supporting them has causedAmerica to
1 reconsider basic principles of its foreign policy.
0 recall many of its senior diplomats from the Middle East.
0 emphasize the principles of deterrence and containment in foreign policy.
0 make dramatic cuts in domestic expenditures to pay for the new war on terrorism.
0 shift back to isolationism. 

Defense spending now makes up about ________ of the federal budget.
1 one-fifth
0 one-third
0 one-half
0 three-fifths
0 one-fourth 

The phrase   guns and butter   refers to
0 politicians who promise money for both military and domestic spending programs.
0 the general economic improvement accompanying the nation's involvement in a major war, though at a high human cost.
1 what many scholars claim is the trade-off a nation faces between defense spending and social spending.
0 the economic impact on cities and towns with military bases or large defense industries.
0 the economic impact of foreign countries with large defense industries. 

In general, American conservatives argue that the breakup of the communist regimes inEastern Europe and the demise of the Soviet Union were principally due to
0 the serious defects of the Soviet economyî€„the inertia, the wastefulness, and the corruption inherent in the system.
0 Mikhail Gorbachev's unexpected and unyielding commitment to glasnost and perestroika.
1 America's defense build-up during the 1980s which the Soviet Union could not match and eventually toppled it.
0 brilliant efforts over several years by various agencies and representatives of the United Nations.
0 political revolution in the Soviet Union. 

Which of the following statements about defense spending is FALSE?
1 Evidence indicates that as defense spending increases, domestic spending decreases.
0 Pressures to cut defense spending and allocate funds to decrease the budget deficit are strong.
0 Conservatives fight deep cuts in defense spending in order to maintain readiness at a high level.
0 Liberals maintain that the Pentagon wastes money and that the United States buys too many guns and too little butter.
0 Defense spending now comprises half of the federal budget. 

Liberals argue that the most crucial aspect of national defense is
0 diplomacy.
0 a strong military capability.
1 a strong economy.
0 international alliances.
0 nuclear deterrence. 

Whatever their ideology, members of Congress tend to support military spending mostconsistently
1 when it means jobs for their constituents.
0 when the Pentagon argues that such programs are necessary.
0 if they are asked to do so by the president.
0 once a project has already begun and needs additional funding.
0 during election years. 

The structure of America's defenses has been based on
0 complete control of the sea and large overseas bases.
0 military control of outer space.
0 strategic nuclear air command and a small but specialized standing army.
1 a large standing military force and a triad of strategic nuclear weapons.
0 the defense of our borders and the ability to fight one minor regional conflict. 

Which of the following is NOT part of America's triad of nuclear weapons delivery systems?
1 Strategic Defense Initiative
0 intercontinental ballistic missiles
0 strategic bombers
0 submarine-launched ballistic missiles
0 both A and C 

The first American president to sign a treaty to actually reduce current levels of nuclearweapons in the United States arsenal was
0 Dwight Eisenhower.
0 Richard Nixon.
0 Jimmy Carter.
1 Ronald Reagan.
0 John Kennedy. 

Arms reduction talks were pushed onto the agenda of discussions between the twosuperpowers in the late 1980s due to all of the following reasons EXCEPT
0 the rapid drive toward democracy in Eastern Europe.
0 Moscow's economic torpor.
0 the Pentagon's budgetary squeeze. Â´
1 President Reagan's consistent policy of detente.
0 the thaw of the Cold War. 

The first American president to sign a treaty to reduce existing levels of nuclear weapons was
0 Richard Nixon.
0 Jimmy Carter.
1 Ronald Reagan.
0 George Bush.
0 Bill Clinton. 


The Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty was the first accord
0 on nuclear weapons signed between the United States and the Soviet Union.
0 to reduce current levels of nuclear weapons.
1 mandating the elimination of many long-range nuclear missiles.
0 cutting conventional arms in Europe.
0 to be rejected by the United States Senate. 

The first American president to unilaterally dismantle some United States nuclear weaponswas
0 Jimmy Carter.
0 Ronald Reagan.
1 George Bush.
0 Bill Clinton.
0 Richard Nixon. 

An agreement between President Bush and President Yeltsin in January 1993 called for
0 the total elimination of nuclear weapons in Europe.
1 elimination of over two-thirds of their long-range nuclear weapons.
0 a moratorium on the manufacture of nuclear weapons.
0 a ban on all intermediate-range nuclear weapons.
0 an indefinite freeze on overall levels of nuclear weapons. 

Which instrument of foreign policy used to guarantee world dominance but no longer doesso?
1 military strength
0 economic sanctions
0 diplomacy
0 none of the above
0 all of the above 

Economic sanctions are
1 non-military sanctions imposed on a foreign government in an attempt to modify its behavior.
0 sanctions imposed by the United States government on multinational corporations.
0 accomplished through the use of tariffs and quotas.
0 typically used as a second resort in an escalating military conflict.
0 an example of a last resort sanction. 

The primary means the United States has used to keep rogue nations from acquiring nuclearweapons has been by
0 successful monitoring of the international arms market.
0 dramatically increasing foreign aid to rogue nations.
0 infiltrating the intelligence communities of the rogue nations.
1 encouraging nations to agree that they would not acquire, or at least test, nuclear weapons.
0 both A and D 

All of the following countries have agreed to give up their nuclear weapons EXCEPT
0 Argentina.
0 Sweden.
1 North Korea.
0 Brazil.
0 Norway. 

All of the following countries are seeking to acquire nuclear weapons EXCEPT
1 Algeria.
0 Iran.
0 Iraq.
0 North Korea.
0 none of the above 

The international economy today is one characterized by
0 independence.
0 isolationism.
1 interdependence.
0 intransigence.
0 protectionism. 

A tariff is a
0 good imported from another country.
0 good exported to another country.
1 tax added to the price of imported goods.
0 tax added to the price of exported goods.
0 tax added to the price of technological goods. 

________ are intended to raise the price of imported goods and thereby protect a nation'sbusinesses and workers from foreign competition.
1 Tariffs
0 Quotas
0 Balances of trade
0 Subsidies
0 Excise taxes 

The one key word that could be used to describe today's international economy is
1 interdependency.
0 protectionism.
0 isolationism.
0 self-sufficiency.
0 bankruptcy. 

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) is a cooperative international organization intended tostabilize
0 diplomatic costs.
1 the exchange of currencies.
0 economic policies between the developed and less developed countries.
0 stock markets in new democracies.
0 protective tariffs. 

The U.S. was involved in humanitarian intervention in which of the following countries?
0 Somalia
0 Haiti
0 Bosnia
0 Kosovo
1 all of the above 

The North American Free Trade Agreement is designed to eventually eliminate most ________among Canada, Mexico, and the United States.
0 subsidies
0 imports
1 tariffs
0 border patrols
0 exports 

International economic policies today tend to emphasize
0 high tariffs and protectionism.
0 central planning and policymaking.
1 lower tariffs and freer trade.
0 heavy reliance on international economic organizations.
0 free trade and protectionism. 

The ratio of what a country pays for imports to what it earns in exports is known as its
0 federal deficit.
1 balance of trade.
0 international productivity quotient.
0 tariff.
0 trade gap. 

Which of the following statements about the balance of trade is FALSE?
1 When a country exports more than it imports, it has a balance of trade deficit.
0 The excess of imports over exports decreases the dollar's buying power against foreign currencies.
0 Since the late 1980s, the United States has experienced an export boom that has given us a balance of trade surplus with Western Europe.
0 A poor balance of trade exacerbates unemployment.
0 A decline in the dollar makes American products cheaper abroad and increases exports. 

Which of the following is TRUE about America's foreign aid programs?
0 Nearly all of the money spent goes to help modernize agriculture and industry in poorer nations, or directly provides food to the hungry.
0 The United States spends a greater percentage of its gross national product on foreign aid than any other developed nation.
0 Among the developed countries of the world, the United States donates the smallest actual amount of foreign aid.
0 Foreign aid has always been a highly popular expenditure with Americans.
1 A substantial percentage of foreign aid is military assistance. 

Which of the following statements about foreign aid is FALSE?
0 Presidents of each party have pressed for aid to nations in the developing world.
0 A major goal of foreign aid is to stabilize nations friendly to the United States.
0 A substantial percentage of foreign aid is in the form of military assistance.
0 Foreign food aid often ends up in the pockets of American farmers.
1 Congress usually increases the president's foreign aid requests. 

The United States
1 donates more total aid than any other country.
0 devotes a larger share of its GNP to foreign economic development than any other country.
0 no longer gives military aid to less developed countries.
0 funnels all of its foreign aid through the United Nations.
0 all of the above 

Which of the following countries spends the smallest percentage of its gross domestic producton foreign economic development?
0 New Zealand
0 Japan
1 United States
0 Italy
0 Norway 

Which of the following nations is least dependent on foreign oil?
0 Japan
1 United States
0 Germany
0 Great Britain
0 the European nations together 

Americans are usually least interested in
0 domestic policy.
1 foreign policy.
0 economic policy.
0 social policy.
0 tax policy. 

When the American people hold strong opinions regarding international relations,
0 they are usually ignored.
0 policymakers manipulate the agenda to emphasize domestic issues.
1 they find policymakers responsive to them.
0 they follow the lead of the president.
0 national security policy decisions are delayed. 

The most pervasive characteristic of American international economic policy is
0 elitism.
0 secrecy.
0 the dominance of the president.
1 pluralism.
0 the lead role played by top State Department officials. 


Since the 1960s the states have become
0 more irrelevant to governance in modern society.
1 revitalized in their institutions, personnel and governance role.
0 more dependent on the federal government.
0 less powerful in their policymaking capacity.
0 more homogeneous in how they govern. 

Every state is governed by ________, in which the basic rules of the political game for thatparticular state are established.
0 the state government clause in the United States Constitution
0 a collection of state statutes
1 a state constitution
0 an official state guidebook
0 the laws of the United States Congress 

Most states
0 do not have their own constitutions.
1 have constitutions more detailed and longer than the United States Constitution.
0 have constitutions less detailed and shorter than the United States Constitution.
0 have unwritten constitutions rather than written constitutions.
0 have constitutions with about the same level of detail as the United States Constitution. 

Which of the following statements about state constitutions is FALSE?
0 A state constitution spells out basic rules of the political game for that particular state.
0 State constitutions are subordinate to the United States Constitution.
0 State constitutions take precedence over state laws.
1 State constitutions are typically much shorter than the United States Constitution.
0 All fifty states have constitutions. 

All state constitutions
0 have provisions for a bicameral legislature.
0 require one legislative session per year.
0 require a balanced budget.
1 have a bill of rights.
0 all of the above 

Historically, state elections have been decided by
1 national political and economic forces.
0 vigorous campaigning on the part of candidates.
0 strong political parties.
0 contributions of Political Action Committees.
0 state political bosses. 


The ________ is the most common method of amending a state constitution.
1 legislative proposal
0 constitutional convention
0 popular initiative
0 simple statute
0 United States Congress 

Which of the following is NOT one of the methods used by states to amend their constitutions?
0 legislative proposal
0 constitutional convention
0 popular initiative
1 simple statute
0 none of the above 

The most common method used to amend state constitutions is through
1 legislative proposal.
0 constitutional convention.
0 popular initiative.
0 judicial review.
0 executive order of the governor. 

One of the consequences of the greater visibility of state elections is that
0 state administration has become more efficient.
0 state policies have become more progressive.
1 state officials have become more representative.
0 media coverage of state politics has increased.
0 citizens know more about state politics. 

Gubernatorial elections have become more   presidentialized   in that they
0 have become more policy-oriented.
0 have come to rely on political party organizations more.
1 have become more personality-focused.
0 receive greater media coverage
0 none of the above 

Since the 1960s, most states have
0 shifted gubernatorial elections to off-Presidential years.
0 reduced the number of elected state executives.
0 changed the governor's term of office to four years.
1 both A and C
0 both B and C 

Gubernatorial elections tend to be decided based on
0 presidential coattails.
0 campaign spending.
1 what voters think about the candidates.
0   hot-button   issues such as abortion.
0 the national economy. 

One result of the personalization of gubernatorial elections has been
0 more of an emphasis on policy positions.
0 the adoption of sunset legislation.
0 weakening of state political parties.
1 divided government.
0 less media coverage. 

State legislative races are
0 more personalized than gubernatorial races.
1 less personalized than gubernatorial races.
0 more personalized than congressional races.
0 not personalized at all.
0 more personalized than presidential elections. 

In the 1960s, a succession of United States Supreme Court decisions required that statelegislative districts be redrawn to
0 follow county lines.
0 ensure the election of more women to the legislature.
0 give rural areas more clout.
1 adhere to the principle of   one man, one vote.  
0 give minority parties more opportunity. 

Prior to the Supreme Court's rulings in the 1960s to end the malapportionment, ________ areaswere overrepresented in many state legislatures.
0 urban
0 suburban
1 rural
0 Republican
0 none of the above 

Until the mid-1960s, the one group that was over-represented in state legislatures was
1 the rural population.
0 women.
0 urban dwellers.
0 minorities.
0 Southerners. 

Increasingly close partisan divisions in state legislatures
0 are relatively new as of the 1990s.
0 are evident only in the South.
1 have occurred in both the North and South.
0 are relatively new as of the 1980s.
0 are evident only in the North. 

Divided government exists when
1 the major parties do not control both chambers of the state legislature and a majority of state elected officials.
0 a single party does not control both chambers of the state legislature.
0 a single party does not control both chambers of the state legislature and a majority of state elected offices.
0 a single party does not control both chambers of the state legislature and the governor's office.
0 when the Republicans and the Democrats hold an equal number of congressional seats. 

Over a ten-year period, about ________ of state legislative seats turned over.
0 10 percent
0 30 percent
0 50 percent
1 75 percent
0 90 percent 

Voters in many states have recently approved ________ to guarantee legislative turnover.
1 term limits
0 reapportionment
0 malapportionment
0 shorter terms of office for state legislative seats
0 recall elections 

The ten-year turnover of state legislative seats
0 occurs at a very slow rate.
0 averages over 90 percent.
1 results in a significant change in the people holding office.
0 is costly to taxpayers, but results in nicely furnished capitols.
0 results in a completely new legislature every ten years. 

Which of these is INCORRECT?
0 The Nebraska legislature only has one house.
0 Although it is the second largest state, the Texas legislature is only scheduled to meet every other year.
1 All states now limit the terms of their legislators.
0 Most state legislatures have become much more professionalized over the past thirty years.
0 Many state legislators are part-timers who have other careers. 

Since 1975, women have
1 had numerous successes in running for governor.
0 had limited success in running for governor.
0 been less successful than African Americans in running for governor.
0 had little interest in running for governor.
0 been less successful than Hispanic Americans in running for governor. 

The states most likely to send women to the United States Senate are those which
0 have elected women as governors.
1 have had high rates of women in the state legislature.
0 have had a strong tradition of women's involvement in school politics.
0 have been in the Midwest.
0 have a high proportion of women in the workforce. 


The executive powers of governors
0 have decreased in modern times.
0 are very strong in almost all states.
1 vary from state to state.
0 usually do not include a veto power.
0 all of the above 



About how many gubernatorial vetoes are overridden by state legislatures?
1 10 percent
0 20 percent
0 30 percent
0 15 percent
0 40 percent 

One power most governors have, but that the president does not, is the
0 ability to initiate legislation.
0 responsibility for preparing the budget.
0 symbolic head of state.
1 line-item veto.
0 executive clemency. 

Which of the following does NOT serve to limit the power of a governor?
0 civil service employment policies in many states
1 the line-item veto
0 other elected executive branch officials, such as the attorney general
0 state constitutional separation of powers
0 none of the above 

Which of the following powers is NOT given to most state governors?
0 line-item veto
0 overseeing the preparation of the state budget
1 holding sole authority in the state's executive branch
0 calling the legislature into special session
0 informal ceremonial authority similar to the president being   Head of State   

The fact that most states have a number of elected state executives in addition to the governor
0 gives the governor greater authority.
1 reduces the authority of the governor.
0 reduces the authority of the legislature.
0 reduces the democratic accountability of the executive branch of state government.
0 has no effect on the authority of the governor. 

A governor's control over policy administration is somewhat diminished because
0 new state constitutions tend to limit the powers of the governor.
1 a large number of other executive branch officials are also elected in most states.
0 of the weakness of state political party structures.
0 state legislatures have taken over many traditional executive duties.
0 all of the above 

The governor and lieutenant governor are elected in separate elections and can be of differentparties
0 in all fifty states.
1 in about half the states.
0 in none of the states.
0 in eight states.
0 in about one-third of the states. 

The lieutenant governor
0 is appointed by the governor in 43 states.
0 runs separately from the governor in seven states.
1 does not exist in seven states.
0 runs with the governor as a team in 42 states.
0 runs with the governor as a team in eight states. 

Most lieutenant governors
0 have substantial authority in the budgetary process.
0 are not in line for succession to the governor.
0 preside over the state house chamber.
1 have few formal duties.
0 none of the above 

Which of the following statements about executive offices other than the governor is FALSE?
0 In some states, it is possible for the two top executives to be members of different political parties.
0 Most lieutenant governors have few formal duties.
0 Eight states don ¹t have a lieutenant governor.
1 Re-organization of state executive branches has resulted in cost-savings and efficiency.
0 One governor was afraid to leave his state because of the lieutenant governor. 

Most modern state legislators are
0 inexperienced.
1 very effective and professional.
0 corrupt.
0 paid on a part-time basis.
0 millionaires. 

Except for Nebraska, each state has a
0 governor and lieutenant governor.
0 unicameral legislature.
1 bicameral legislature.
0 supreme court.
0 plural executive. 

A bicameral legislature is one that
0 meets every two years.
0 holds two sessions a year.
0 has only one house.
1 has two houses.
0 is evenly divided between Democrats and Republicans by law. 

Most states provide for legislative sessions every
1 year.
0 two years.
0 three years.
0 four years.
0 week except holidays. 

In the states, making laws is the legal function of
1 state legislatures.
0 governors.
0 state courts.
0 state agencies.
0 direct democracy. 

Most state legislators
0 mirror the characteristics of their constituents.
1 have professional jobs.
0 are women.
0 lack a college education.
0 are from rural areas. 

Reforms of state legislatures oriented toward enhancing their   legislative professionalism  include all of the following EXCEPT
1 lengthening legislative sessions.
0 increasing the number of legislative committees.
0 increasing the salary of state legislators.
0 increasing the staff available to state legislators.
0 none of the above 

A recent policy change in some states that actually   deprofessionalizes   legislature is
0 sunset legislation.
0 line-item veto.
1 term limits.
0 Dillon's rule.
0 Missouri Plan. 

The judicial system in most states is set up
0 as the lowest level of the federal court system, with the states having little say over structure or operations.
0 in a haphazard fashion, with trial courts and appellate courts differing county by county, municipality by municipality.
0 without an appellate level; any appeals of state trial court decisions go directly to the United States Supreme Court.
1 as a hierarchical system under state control, similar in its organization to the federal court system.
0 as a merit system. 

Compared to the federal district courts, state courts, on average, hear ________ trials andappeals.
0 far fewer
0 somewhat fewer
0 somewhat more
1 far more
0 about the same number of 

The judicial branch in most states operates on a ________ system.
0 single-level
0 two-tier
1 three-tier
0 four-tier
0 circular 

In the state judicial system, it is at the ________ level that the facts are considered before asingle judge and a jury.
0 federal district court
1 trial court
0 appellate court
0 court of last resort
0 none of the above 

All states have a ________, usually called the supreme court, that is the final appellate level ina state.
1 court of last resort
0 trial court
0 intermediate court of appeals
0 judicial review
0 criminal court 

Which of the following statements about the state court of last resort is FALSE?
0 State courts of last resort are the final appellate level in a state.
1 State courts of last resort only hear criminal cases.
0 State courts of last resort are headed by a chief justice.
0 State courts of last resort may practice judicial review.
0 They have recently exhibited a new wave of liberal activism. 

State courts of appeals
0 are organized on a local basis.
0 hear only the facts of a case.
1 decide cases using a panel of three or more judges.
0 have seen their case load decrease in recent years.
0 use juries in 42 states. 

The ________ is a system of appointing judges based on merit, with the governor given a list ofqualified persons from the state bar or a committee of jurists and other officials from whom tomake a selection, and the appointment subject to the state's voters deciding on retaining thejudge.
0 judicial review
0 judicial restraint
1 Merit Plan
0 sunset law
0 Missouri Plan 



Most state judges
0 are appointed by the governor.
1 are elected by the voters.
0 serve for life.
0 are not reelected.
0 are appointed by the legislature. 

The form of direct democracy that allows the public to directly adopt a policy without anyinvolvement of the state legislature is
0 recall.
0 referendum.
1 initiative.
0 direct primary.
0 none of the above 

The initiative is undemocratic to the extent that it
0 puts power in the hands of citizens.
0 contains ambiguous language.
0 may be used to restrict tax increases.
1 is often the tool of wealthy groups and individuals.
0 contains specific language. 

Issues dealing with ________ are often proposed by referenda.
0 corrupt public officials
0 special district creation
1 school bonds
0 racial equality
0 the tax system 

Under state constitutions, local governments are considered ________ the state government.
1 subdivisions of
0 coequal with
0 superior to
0 totally separate from
0 interchangeable with 

County government usually consists of an elected county ________ that makes policy and acollection of   row officers   who run county services.
0 congress
0 board of education
0 directorate
1 commission
0 mayor 

Which of the following is NOT one of the   row officers   who usually run county services?
1 commissioner
0 sheriff
0 clerk
0 assessor
0 prosecutor 

________ governments are found in only twenty states, with those in New England having themost power.
0 Municipal
1 Township
0 County
0 Special district
0 Borough 

Which of the following do rural residents rely on most for services?
0 state governments
1 county governments
0 the Farm Bureau
0 special districts
0 agricultural cooperatives 

The administrative arm of state government in local areas is
0 special districts.
0 municipalities.
1 county governments.
0 districts and wards.
0 the state legislator. 

Which of the following statements about townships is FALSE?
1 Almost every state has township governments.
0 Most township governments have limited powers.
0 In New England, townships function much like city governments.
0 Most townships lack power to pass local ordinances.
0 They are extensions of state and county government. 

________ government normally provides police and fire protection, street maintenance, solidwaste collection, water and sewage works, and similar services.
0 National
0 State
1 Municipal
0 School district
0 County 

The level of government that typically provides most of the police and fire protection is
0 state government.
0 counties.
1 municipalities.
0 special districts.
0 township. 

Originally, most local communities in the United States operated under a
1 town meeting system.
0 mayor-council government.
0 council-manager government.
0 commission government.
0 mayor-only system. 

Which of the following types of municipal government is not in common use today?
1 town meeting government
0 mayor-council government
0 council-manager government
0 commission government
0 weak-mayor government 

Under the ________ system of municipal government, the city government bureaucracy isdirected by an appointed administrator.
0 mayor-council with a strong mayor
0 mayor-council with a weak mayor
1 council-manager
0 commission
0 command 

In the ________ government, used in only a few cities, voters elect a panel of officials whoserve both as legislators and as executives of a functional area of city government, such aspublic safety.
0 strong mayor, mayor-council
0 weak mayor, mayor-council
0 council-manager
1 commissioner
0 mayor-manager 

Most city council members and mayors are
0 appointed by the governor.
0 appointed by city managers.
0 elected on partisan ballots.
1 elected on non-partisan ballots.
0 none of the above 

At-large elections for the city council were begun
1 to reform municipal government and reduce the power of political machine bosses.
0 to give more power to old-time political machine bosses.
0 as a way to increase minority group representation on city councils.
0 to simplify the printing of election ballots throughout the city.
0 to consolidate elections into one election to cut election costs. 

Most mayor-council cities
0 follow the strong mayor form.
1 follow the weak mayor form.
0 have a city manager to carry out policy.
0 have over 500,000 residents.
0 use the commission system. 

In a council-manager form of government, the implementation and administration of policy isplaced in the hands of
0 the city council itself.
0 a mayor.
1 a city manager.
0 a county manager.
0 the chief administrative officer. 

The type of city government that combines legislative and executive function in the same bodyis the
0 mayor-council government.
0 council-manager government.
1 commission government.
0 district-ward government.
0 consolidated municipality. 

The type of municipal government used least in the United States is the
0 mayor-council government with weak mayor.
0 mayor-council government with strong mayor.
0 council-manager government.
1 commission government.
0 mayor-manager-government. 

A majority of cities elect council members
1 at large.
0 in partisan elections.
0 according to districts or wards.
0 on the basis of proportional representation.
0 by multiple-member districts. 

A consequence of at-large city council elections is that
0 they tend to create public policies that benefit individual neighborhoods.
1 minority group members have had difficulty gaining election to city council.
0 elections have become much less competitive.
0 they have given greater power to city bosses.
0 all of the above 

Most school systems are run
0 by city government.
1 as independent local governments.
0 by the state governments.
0 by the national government.
0 by county government. 

Which of the following does state government generally NOT do in regard to public educationin the 1990s?
0 mandate certain programs
0 provide a certain amount of state funding
0 adopt general standards for educational policy and school buildings
1 build and operate the schools
0 none of the above 

Independent school districts are responsible for each of the following EXCEPT
0 electing a board of education.
0 picking administrators and teachers.
0 adopting and funding an education budget.
1 adopting general standards for education policy and school buildings.
0 designing and running education programs. 

Local revenue sources for schools are heavily dependent upon the ________ tax.
0 federal income
0 state income
1 local property
0 state and/or local sales
0 lottery revenue 

Which of the following is the most widely expressed criticism of paying for public schoolsprimarily through the local property taxes?
0 It makes local control over schools more difficult.
1 It means that wealthier school districts can provide more educational money than poorer districts.
0 The elderly and those without children are forced to pay for public education.
0 Property values rise and fall so much that local school boards have no idea how much money they will have to spend.
0 Higher property taxes discourage local development. 

________ represent the fastest growing form of subnational government during the pastdecade.
0 Municipal governments
1 Special districts
0 County governments
0 School districts
0 State governments 

Which of the following is normally classified as a special district?
1 park
0 county
0 municipal
0 township
0 city borough 

The fastest growing form of local government in the United States is
0 county.
0 municipality.
1 special district.
0 school districts.
0 townships. 

Which of the following types of governments are the most numerous in the United States?
0 counties
0 municipalities
0 townships
1 special districts
0 school districts 

Local revenue sources for schools are disproportionally based upon the
0 income tax.
1 property tax.
0 sales tax.
0 state lotteries.
0 local business tax. 

Special districts in the United States are characterized by their
0 uniformity.
0 scarcity.
0 partisanship.
1 organizational diversity.
0 inflexibility. 

All of the following are limits on local government EXCEPT
0 fragmentation of local government power.
0 constitutional limitations.
1 high levels of citizen involvement.
0 competition with other local governments.
0 none of the above 

Particularly in rural areas, ________ government is the administrative arm of most stategovernments, keeping records of births, deaths, and marriages, conducting a system of justiceand law enforcement, maintaining roads and bridges, and providing other services.
0 regional
1 county
0 municipal
0 township
0 commission 

Councils of Governments have been formed to
0 reform state and local campaign practices.
0 improve the public image of local governments.
0 lobby state legislatures on behalf of localities.
1 improve cooperation between local governments.
0 streamline local government bureaucracy. 

Which of these is not a source of state revenue?
1 property taxes
0 the federal government
0 state insurance programs
0 charges for services
0 fuel taxes 

Which of the following program areas would tend to receive the smallest percentage of statemoney in most states?
0 education
0 prisons
1 natural resources
0 transportation
0 health care 

States receive the largest portion of revenue from
0 lotteries.
0 federal government.
0 user fees.
1 taxes.
0 business property taxes. 

Most local government moneys are allocated to
0 social services.
0 public safety.
1 education.
0 transportation.
0 local government administrative expenses. 

Which of the following is NOT one of the largest sources of local government revenues?
0 property tax and other taxes
0 charges on users of services
0 intergovernmental funds
1 lotteries
0 income tax 


